---
num: 0
title: "Milestones and Reflections: 100 Episodes of Bendy Bodies with Linda Bluestein, MD"
date: "2024-05-30"
duration: "1h 19m"
description: "Dr. Linda Bluestein celebrates 100 episodes of Bendy Bodies discussing the most rewarding part of hosting the podcast and the challenges of podcasting. She emphasizes the importance of balancing the complexity of EDS and the need for healthcare professionals to understand and empathize with the struggles of patients with hypermobility conditions. Dr. Bluestein discusses the symptom burden experienced by individuals with EDS and the challenges they face in getting their symptoms understood and validated by healthcare professionals. She shares her approach to treatment as well as the top three concerns among EDS patients. Dr. Linda Bluestein and guest host Kate Colbert discuss the importance of effective communication between doctors and patients, and the need for healthcare professionals to understand the patient's perspective. Dr. Bluestein shares her goals for the Bendy Bodies podcast and they end with a hypermobility hack for traveling with EDS."
tags:
 - "EDS"
 - "MCAS"
 - "Treatment"
 - "Hypermobility"
audioUrl: "https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH9119689832.mp3?updated=1724424601"
videoUrl: ""
snippets: []
guests:
 - "Dr. Linda Bluestein"
guestImages: []
---
Kate Colbert: Hello, every bendy body. It's Kate Colbert, your guest host of today's episode of the Bendy Bodies Podcast. And this is a really exciting episode. It is episode— are you ready? Episode 100. Oh my gosh. So the Bendy Bodies Podcast has been such an important part of advancing understanding of Ehlers-Danlos syndromes and related conditions. And this is huge. So I am here sitting in Dr. Linda Bluestein's, regular chair while she sits in the hot seat as the guest so we can celebrate her and celebrate the success of the Bendy Bodies Podcast. So here we are.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Welcome back, every bendy body. This is the Bendy Bodies Podcast, and I'm your host and founder, Dr. Linda Bluestein. The Hypermobility MD. This is going to be a great episode, so be sure to stick around until the very end so you don't miss any of our special hypermobility hacks. As always, this information is for educational purposes only and is not a substitute for personalized medical advice.

Kate Colbert: Dr. Bluestein, congratulations, 100 episodes! Can you believe it?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: No, I can't. it's, it's, it's interesting because in some ways it feels like it should be 500, but in other ways it feels like it should be, you know, 20 or something. So yeah, you know, I'm really excited.

Kate Colbert: You've come a long way. So let's dig into this. So let's celebrate, 100 episodes by talking about some things that your listeners might be curious about and talking about sort of where you've been and where you're headed, and maybe dig into some topics that you haven't covered yet in the first 100 episodes. So let's talk about what it's like to be Dr. Bluestein. I want to know what's the most rewarding part of taking all of your medical expertise and what you've learned over the years and your insights about hypermobility disorders like EDS. What's it been like to take that to the airwaves and to the masses? So what's been the most rewarding part of that?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Definitely feedback from listeners, you know, getting messages, whether it's direct messages on Instagram, you know, messages on X/Twitter, LinkedIn, emails, messages that they leave directly on the website. I mean, that is by far the most rewarding thing, hearing from people how valuable the information has been, how helpful, how it has changed their life in some way. Just means so much to me because it is a labor of love. I don't know that most people realize how much work goes into a podcast. I know before I had one, I was like, oh, it's just people talking, how hard can it be? But you don't realize the planning and the editing and, you know, scheduling the guests and all of the different relationship management.

Kate Colbert: Yeah, yeah, exactly. All of those things. And then, you know, planning to publish it and the transcripts and the, you know, all of that, show notes, etc. So, so I think that, you know, it just makes the work all the worthwhile when I get messages from people that it has really been meaningful for them. It just makes it, the work, meaningful for me. So that is definitely the most valuable for me and the most rewarding part for me.

Yeah. Yeah. And it's kind of overwhelming to think about that, you know, in, in your medical practice, you're seeing one patient at a time or maybe a, you know, a family coming in together, but, but sort of one-to-one sort of medical care. And when you look at the statistics for, for the show, it must be interesting to be thinking about like, wow, that, you know, that one set of comments, that one conversation that I— that we had on that particular date or that particular episode impacting thousands of people and what, what that's like.

What is the hardest part, and what's been the hardest part, sort of ramping up and doing these sort of first 100 episodes?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, of course there's always a learning curve with everything, so, you know, figuring out the best platform to record on, and, you know, how to deliver the information in a meaningful way, and what people really want to gain from a podcast, and things like that. And who's listening? Who is the real audience? And of course, there's different people in the audience, and I know we're going to talk about that. But I'd say probably what's been really hard is figuring out a way to share information in a way that is both fair and helpful. And what I mean by that is, you know, fair to the listener. So anyone listening to this is unique. Every single person is unique. So when I'm on a one-on-one appointment, right, like you said, I know exactly— well, I know as much as they're telling me. I know what's going on with that person. I can see them. I'm doing a physical exam with them. Like, I can deliver the information in a way that is specific to them. With the podcast, that's not the case. I don't know if the person listening is, you know, in bed 20 hours a day and is not able to up and moving around because they have such bad CCI or craniocervical instability, or maybe they're not up and moving around because their POTS is so severe. Or maybe they have ME/CFS. Like, I don't know what's going on with that person. Or maybe they're actually functioning quite well and they're looking for tips so that they stay functioning well. So each person is so unique and what applies to one person doesn't apply to the other person.

So, so that's the first thing I find challenging. The second thing I find really, really challenging, and I hope I'm going to explain this well, is offering the correct dose of hope. Because I feel like sometimes when I hear things, everything sounds so perfect and rosy. Like, it's like I just came back from a conference actually where I got to speak to sports medicine physicians about hypermobility, which was an incredible opportunity. And I'm so grateful to the folks who supported my presentation because it was just really great to talk to these sports medicine physicians, a lot of whom were not that— like, they knew about hypermobility, but they didn't realize the multisystemic effects and, you know, how common it is and a lot of things like that. But, you know, when you sit there and listen to a talk, everything sounds great. And it sounds like everything works all the time. And, you know, I would like to say that I have cured every single person I've ever seen, and that's not true. I mean, I would be lying if, if I said that. I have helped a lot of people. actually, the word cure I shouldn't even use at all. I've helped a lot of people. A lot of people have gotten a lot better, but there's some people that I haven't helped. And so while the podcast is a great source of information, and I think it's, so important for people to have hope because there's so many things that they can do, and in many cases they haven't even tried that many things yet, I also want to be responsible. I don't want to let people think that if their doctor hasn't done ABC, like their doctor is wrong or bad or whatever. So I feel like that's hard balancing that, you know, like, like it, it can sound so idealistic or easy to do this particular workup or that particular thing.

And thirdly, I want to be fair to the healthcare professionals who themselves are likely struggling in a system that doesn't support them. Or support them caring for this population that has really complex and time-consuming needs. I have a friend who has EDS. She's a family practice doc, and she had a clinic in a regular, you know, insurance-based practice. And they told her she had to stop taking EDS patients. And I don't know what she's up to now, but she closed her clinic ultimately. So she went from like this practice to, you know, now no practice, at least last I knew she wasn't practicing. So, you know, it's, it's really, really hard nowadays to be a physician. It's really hard to be a physical therapist. I mean, my physical therapist was telling me yesterday about how she's charting late at night at home, you know, the— between the regulatory struggles, etc. there's a lot of challenges. So it can be easy to make things sound so simple on a podcast, and I, and I want to be respectful to all of the different parties and be a problem solver. so that's hard to balance those things.

Kate Colbert: Wow. It's, it, it's powerful to hear you talk about that. And as a patient, you know, I thank you for that. I, you know, I've been listening since the very beginning and, maybe your biggest fan. And, though there are a lot of fans out there who probably be willing to fight me for that title. you know, and I think that you're doing a really great job of that. And I think what I hear you saying is that it's not just complex to have EDS and it's not just complex to treat EDS. It's complex to talk about EDS.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes. Right. That's a brilliant way to put it. Yes.

Kate Colbert: And that's exactly what you've done here is that you have made this commitment to go onto the airwaves over and over again, and invite different types of guests and different types of experts, and, and various, areas of complication of connective tissue disorders. And to have really meaningful conversations and to have relatively in-depth conversations and yet know that you can't possibly cover it all. You can't possibly talk about every type of patient profile or type of story or type of outcome for different kinds of interventions. And so there are going to be moments when patients who are listening or families who are listening or healthcare providers who are listening are going to say that strikes a chord for me, that aligns with my experience. And other times people are going to say, that's not quite how I experienced that symptom, or that's not how my body reacted to that sort of intervention.

And I love your thought around sort of how much hope, what sort of what size the dose of hope. And if I can say something, which I think is a sensitive topic, but related to what you're getting at is we are in a really interesting inflection point in awareness around EDS right now, right? So this, this episode is being recorded in 2022 at a moment when awareness about EDS is as good as it's ever been, and it's still significantly lacking, right? So we're— it's, you know, 5 or 10 years ago, I could mention that I had EDS to somebody and, and, and well, 10 years ago I wasn't because I wasn't diagnosed until 5 years ago when I was 45. I'm 50 now. But 5 years ago I could tell somebody I had been diagnosed with EDS and they had no idea what I was talking about. And now I can, you know, say something and, you know, the cashier at the grocery store says, oh, my granddaughter has that. Right. And so there's more awareness. More people are getting diagnosed. There's more information out. Social media has been a big help in that. Patients telling their own stories, podcast platforms, and shows like yours have been instrumental to that.

And yet, as there is more information available, there will inevitably be more misinformation available. And that's one of the things I really struggle with as not just a patient trying to parse out what could be helpful to me, but as an advocate, as the founder of a nonprofit. So for people who don't— are not familiar with EDS Guardians, I'm the founder and executive director of EDS Guardians, which is a nonprofit that is a patient-to-patient, caregiver-to-caregiver pay-it-forward organization that helps EDS patients who lack care and need vital support. And I struggle sometimes when I'm trying to find information because patients will come to us with very unique complications of their illness that maybe I don't relate to personally because I haven't suffered those issues, and I'm trying to find the right information for them. And there's a lot of information out there that, to your point, simplifies things too much. Right. So it's, it's difficult to make a TikTok video about something as complex as gastroparesis or craniocervical instability and sort of explain it in a way that doesn't dumb it down in a way that could be potentially even dangerous.

And so, so I think that that is, that's challenging. One of the things I appreciate the most actually about the Bendy Bodies Podcast is that you have not sort of given in to this trend to try to make everything sort of short and punchy and oversimplified, right? So if a conversation with one of your guests, if for them to be able to really sort of explain whatever their area of expertise is, as it relates to EDS requires a 45-minute conversation or an hour and 15-minute conversation, that's what you're going to deliver, right? You never, shortchange the conversation, which I appreciate. And by the way, that's the beauty of a podcast. If you have time to listen to the whole episode, you listen to the whole episode, or if you're like me, you break it into thirds. So I sometimes will listen to like a third or half of an episode while I'm doing my makeup in the morning, and then I might listen to the other third when I'm out for a walk later that day or before bedtime. I try to do them all in the same day, but break it into little stints. And so it's like going to a conference when I listen to your podcast. So I love that. So thank you.

Okay, so we've talked about the rewarding parts and the hard parts and the important parts. I want to come back to something you said a minute ago about that rewarding part about the listeners who reach out to you. And there's maybe listeners who are listening to this episode who don't realize how easy you are to reach and that they can send comments to you through the Bendy Bodies website, etc. Tell me a little bit, because I know you get a lot of questions and feedback from people on social media and through the website forms. What are some of your favorite comments and questions that have come in from the Bendy Bodies community so far in the first 100 episodes?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So, so I'm going to break those into 4 categories. So, so the first category is patients. You know, again, when they tell me how helpful it is to hear tips that, you know, they, they share with me that they actually bought this brace that they heard about, or they tried this particular movement pattern, or, you know, working, they tried again to go to physical therapy, didn't just, you know, give up because they had a bad experience, whatever it might be. So, when I get those kind of, you know, feedback and also the validation piece, so many people tell me how validating it is. Like, they feel like I'm speaking directly to them. And that's the goal. That is exactly the goal. I try to think of every single one of my patients. And I remember I was at an EDS conference once, the EDS Society Conference, and I was talking to one of the— I might have been talking actually to Dr. Fraser Henderson. And I was asking him about a couple of my patients. And he was so kind of surprised. And I was like, well, I have a small practice on purpose so that I can know who everyone is. And I am thinking of these people in the back of my mind when I record an episode, when I plan an episode, I'm thinking of the listeners when I plan and record episodes, et cetera.

I've had people tell me that patients tell me that, you know, I was the first person who ever gave them any kind of a hint about persistent pain, widespread pain, allodynia, which is where things that are normally not painful are painful, you know, that those things could be a sign of hypermobility syndromes. And that they then went and got an evaluation and got a diagnosis. And that if it wasn't for the podcast, they would never have gotten that diagnosis. And so that, that really means a lot to me that they're sharing that with me and taking the time to send me a message and say, if it wasn't for you, I would not have gotten a diagnosis. And, you know, kind of like what you had mentioned earlier, I came to the realization towards the end of my anesthesia career that I was taking care of one patient at a time, or if I was working with a nurse anesthetist, maybe a few patients at a time. But I wanted to reach more people. I would go to conferences and I would hear speakers and I would think, there's got to be— as I'm in like the second half of my life and, you know, approaching 60, it's like, okay, I gotta go, I gotta work faster. Because there's more I have to do before I leave this planet. And so like, I got to figure out a way to reach more people. So, so definitely, you know, when I get those, those messages, it's like, okay, good. So glad to know that it's working and that they got to see somebody who made the diagnosis and evaluated them properly.

The second category is healthcare professionals. I hear from a ton of physical therapists, physicians, etc. that they've gotten information from the show that has helped them take better care of their patients. And I'm thinking of a person in particular. She's a pediatrician, and I don't know why she picked the show to listen to, but she did. And she said she was listening to it and she was like, huh, I wonder if I have EDS. So she pursued the diagnosis and was diagnosed with hypermobile EDS, then realized I have a lot of kids in my practice that are on that hypermobility spectrum. So, they might have hypermobile EDS, they might have hypermobility spectrum disorder, they might have something else, but they're hypermobile and/or they have unstable joints. This is the category that they belong to, the big bucket. And so, that really meant so much to me because, of course, you know, she's expressing gratitude towards me and saying how, you know, it changed her life. But now, she's changing other people's lives.

Kate Colbert: Yeah. That's exponential.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Because she's recognizing it in other people. So, when, when people ask, well, who listens to the podcast? I'm like, it's a lot of different types of people. And I want it to be that way because I want healthcare professionals to listen and feel like they can walk away with something that, that they can use to help their patients, because that's a way to help even more people, like you said, exponential.

And then I get messages from caregivers sometimes that, you know, they can better understand their loved one when they hear things being described. And I've done a lot of episodes that are inspirational episodes that are talking to people with EDS. And, you know, so they hear those stories and they think, oh, okay, maybe the person in my life is not crazy or lazy. You know, these are real things. These are real problems.

And then the fourth category is companies. And I've gotten some lovely, lovely messages from nonprofit organizations. And of course, I love our partnership with EDS Guardians, which is an amazing organization, which I'm so excited about and so excited to see how things evolve there. But I've had nonprofit organizations reach out and want to form partnerships, want to become sponsors, collaborate, and things like that. Or other companies, you know, companies that have things to sell or whatever. So it really comes in multiple different forms. But getting all of those messages just, you know, again, makes the work worthwhile.

Kate Colbert: Wow, I love that. I love that you're hearing from the community because I'm sure that when you first started that you, you wonder who's listening, right?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Kate Colbert: I mean, so anybody who's ever, you know, worked on the radio or whatever, you, you sort of wonder like, who's out there, right?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

Kate Colbert: and that's, and that's why call-in shows, you know, became so popular on radio. And, and, so I love the fact that, that folks are reaching out to you. that story about the pediatrician is really powerful, the exponential effect of every, and I would suspect that every single episode, every single listener, maybe even, you know, learns something that maybe helps them personally or helps one person in their life. But as that, right? So there's that, that beautiful sort of marketing concept of tell two friends, right? You know, if you enjoyed eating lunch at this cafe, tell two friends. And if they tell two friends and they tell two friends, suddenly you don't, you don't have to do any advertising, right? and, it's the dream. but I feel like that that's the case with your podcast as well.

I remember listening to an episode really early on, one of your very early episodes when you were doing a lot of focus on dance medicine and dancers and sort of artistic athletes who, who were hypermobile. And you had somebody on and they were talking, they were talking about different kinds of sort of pain, that, that happened. And they're talking about small fiber neuropathy and there was a description of sort of what that can feel like. And a light bulb went off for me and it was not a symptom that I have, but it was a symptom that somebody in my family has. And so I was able to pick up the phone to that family member and say, hey, I think that thing you've been describing for years that seems like mysterious and elusive, I think I know what that might be. And this might be something you want to ask your doctor about. And so, so that's really exciting when you think about how many people are being helped every single day by the podcast.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And your thought about the light bulb moments is interesting because I've literally had people say, like, it's so uncanny how the timing of things sometimes. Like, I know this one person was like, I was struggling with this thing and you had an episode about it. Then I was struggling with this other thing and then you had an episode about that. And they said, I was almost afraid to tune in the following week because—

Kate Colbert: Yeah.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Because it— Yeah. Yeah.

And it is true that sometimes, you know, that's why I think it's great to, to address things multiple times or in different ways. But, you know, because different people will describe things differently. Yeah. So what resonates one time doesn't necessarily resonate with another person, you know, another time. So it's really helpful to— there's no end to topics, right? And I love getting topic suggestions and, you know, guest suggestions and things like that.

Kate Colbert: Yeah, I love that. And I actually appreciate that too, that you don't ever think that a topic is sort of one and done on the show, which I really love that. So, you know, so as, you know, as I have begun to get sicker and sicker with my upper cervical instability and sort of headed towards maybe a, you know, a surgery related to that, I've been able to sort of go back through Bendy Bodies and take a look at like, you know, where are you talking about craniocervical instability and where are you talking about non-surgical options and, you know, talking to physical therapists and, you know, dentists and talking about the jaw and all these things that are sort of related, as well as, you know, talking to neurosurgeons about how this is addressed surgically. And it's really, really helpful to hear you and your guests talking about really important topics from different angles. Yeah. And I think that that's really helpful as a listener for me to be able to sort of get all of that.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And again, I often liken the show to a medical conference, right? So, you know, I'm a big fan of the Ehlers-Danlos Society Global Learning Conference that they hold every year. And, you know, this year, 2024, when this is being recorded, they're actually having a thing about CCI and they're having like 4 or 5 physicians who are all talking about it back to back. You know, everybody's got 20 minutes and they're talking about different approaches and different insights about it. And I think that, you know, when you bring on all these different guests that will talk about different issues, whether it's joint pain or whatnot, the more we hear about different perspectives, the more we can apply it to our lives. Or if I'm a healthcare professional, the more I can apply it to my patients. And so I do believe that for folks who are listening episode after episode, the learning ends up being sort of that phrase, whatever, that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts kind of a thing. and I, and I do believe that, about your show.

Kate Colbert: I love, by the way, that you can go to the Bendy Bodies website and search by topic, or search by name. So you don't, you know, if you, if you're having some brain fog, as is fairly common in this condition, and you heard a little bit of an episode and you wanna go back and find it, it's really easy to go to your website and type in the guest name or type in the topic, with all those show notes and whatnot, or, or search by topic, in that dropdown. So that's super helpful, for folks who maybe suddenly are having trouble with their dysautonomia, that they can come and do a deep dive on dysautonomia and listen to just those episodes this week. and so I find that incredibly helpful. So I, I thank you for that.

we've talked a little bit about healthcare professionals, and I know that you recently just had another episode that I got to be on as well, about EDS awareness where you gave some really great tips to healthcare professionals, to sort of increase their awareness about hypermobility conditions. And so, and folks who haven't heard that episode should go back and listen to that one for sure. But what do you wish— so let's maybe reiterate a little bit of that, or we can address that in a different way. What do you wish all healthcare professionals knew about hypermobility conditions? Or if you'd rather, what do you wish they would do or think differently when it comes— so maybe they're aware about EDS, but maybe the way that their mindset is around these conditions or the way that they're approaching them is maybe not optimal. So what, what do you think people wish that healthcare professionals knew, or thought or did differently when it comes to EDS?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I really wish that they would realize that people with symptomatic joint hypermobility are actually, most all of them, incredibly heroic. I know it's really hard to understand what it's like to live in an EDS body if you don't have one. But seeing people going— that keep going despite having just incredibly crazy and wonky things happen to their bodies that honestly I think are really hard to fathom sometimes. I think it's just so, so hard to relate to this, and it's incredibly admirable how people keep going through these things. Severe upper cervical instability, abdominal compression syndromes, POTS, mast cell activation syndrome, spontaneous CSF leaks, you know, headaches that last for years. Like, you know, the things that people are still putting one foot in front of the other, or in some cases, you know, in bed and making it to the bathroom and back or whatever. the things that people deal with on a day-to-day basis is so, so mind-boggling. And I think that most healthcare professionals, if they haven't lived even a small amount of that, it's just really, really hard for them to relate.

I gave a talk a number of years ago, and I came up with this— I sometimes use flip charts when I give talks in person— and I came up with this idea, and I just drew like a line of, you know, if this is your symptom burden, like, you know, it's going to vary over time, but let's say it's up here. It's like it ranges between 90 and 100, or, you know, 80 and 100 most of the time. So, you know, you're dealing with— I'm just making the top of the scale 100, so you could be dealing with 50 symptoms or 60 or whatever, which is a ton, by the way. Like, that's a ton of symptoms. But if you're up here at the top of the scale and you're faring like this, and your doctor is— by the way, I'm showing this with my hands, and I mean, not that this is like— probably— look on YouTube if you really want to see where I'm going with my hands, I guess is what I'm trying to say. And if your doctor has been healthy like most all of their life and has always lived down here, zero symptoms. Maybe they've gotten the flu and they've barely like been a little bit, or, you know, maybe they've been sick with the flu, but then they go right back down, right? It is so hard to bridge that gap. I just feel like that is such a hard thing to do as a patient and as a healthcare professional.

Kate Colbert: I would say that I got a lot of gaslighting before I got diagnosed. And not that I haven't after I got diagnosed, but I got a lot of gaslighting before I got diagnosed. And one person in particular, I know I knew her fairly well and she was really super healthy, really athletic, like, you know, had lived in this body that just performed the way she wanted it to perform. And I think it was just really hard for her to understand a person's body who doesn't. So I think that, you know, if you can even just try for a minute to put yourself in the other person's shoes, you know, in medical school now, sometimes they will do different, like, more real-life scenarios where they'll actually have you wear, like, a glucose monitor, and they'll have you, you know, pretend like you're a diabetic, and then you have to be checking your insulin. And, well, I guess if you're wearing the monitor, but you know what I'm getting at. So, and giving yourself, you know, it's saline shots, of course, but giving yourself the shots. And then they would even do things like lock you out of your car. I mean, I don't know if they actually do that, but maybe they'll send you a text message. You just got locked out of your car. Your insulin is in your car, and your blood sugar is 450. What are you going to do?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, wow.

Kate Colbert: And I think that, you know, if somebody can come up with a simulator— this is a note if you're listening and you have an idea of coming up with some kind of a simulator that, you know, you were just walking, minding your own business, and your ankle dislocated. And now you've got to pop it back in, or maybe you don't know how to pop it back in, or whatever it might be. But, you know, I think that it's just so, so hard for so many people to relate to these things. And it's hard to wrap your brain around something like spontaneous CSF leak. Like, right, what? We're not taught that you can have a spontaneous CSF leak, you know. We're just not taught that. So I think that that's where I really wish people would just open their mind, open their hearts, and try to not be like, that can't happen.

And, and for patients to open their minds and their hearts. If you see your doctor Googling Ehlers-Danlos, or they don't know how to pronounce it, which by the way, I see people complain about that on social media. That doesn't mean they're a bad doctor, and that doesn't mean they're not going to help you. Maybe they actually are going to help you. Maybe they're Googling it because, you know, they're not that familiar, but they're going to actually try and learn, and they're going to want to help you. So just like you don't want them to judge you, try not to judge them.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's great advice. That's great advice. I love that. And I, yeah, I think that I don't care how they pronounce it, as long as they're interested, as long as they're interested in helping me.

Kate Colbert: I had a really beautiful moment the other day in physical therapy, and I'm a, like a lot of us who are, you know, aging and have sort of cumulative effects on our body of having EDS, even though EDS is not technically a progressive condition, you know, but it— the injuries can be cumulative for sure. I have a new physical therapist, and she's great, and I'm her first EDS patient. but she, she was very interested. In fact, when my previous PT was relocating, and I cried when I found out she was leaving, I asked, so who's going to take care of me now? And I was able— I was allowed to choose physical therapists from among that practice, and I was able to ask, who do you think is really curious? Who do you think is willing to learn? Who do you think won't get overly frustrated if after session after session they find that they're flaring me because I have, you know, high irritability or cervical instability? You know, if they feel like they're hurting me more than they're helping me, who's not going to give up on me and who's not going to give up on themselves? And we were able to identify very quickly a PT who we thought could do that.

And she said to me this week, we did one tiny little exercise that flared me and I ended up with sort of like a neuro crisis. And, and she knew how to get me through it and was icing my head and the whole bit. And afterwards she— I was so afraid she was going to break up with me, that she was going to do what dozens of PTs have done and left me in tears and said, I just feel like I don't know how to help you. I'm going to go ahead and discharge you, which has happened to me over and over again. And by the way, for patients who are listening to this and that has happened to them, that's physical therapy or whatever that modality is that you're— that's, that's the modality or the system failing you. That's not you failing PT. That's not you failing. And that doesn't mean that your condition cannot be helped. It just means that the system is sort of not set up to, to help you, and your provider doesn't feel like they know how to provide different customized extraordinary service for your extraordinary body.

And I was so pleased with what she said to me, cause I was so afraid she was, cause I could tell she was feeling defeated that everything she tries causes a problem, right? I had a hypertensive crisis recently at PT and my blood pressure went to 230 over 150, right? Like, and this is happening, these things happen. And she said to me, Kate, it's clear to me that I'm going to have to do a lot more learning. And I'm going to have to, and she told me about what books she just ordered, including, you know, Taming the Zebra, from guests who were recently on your podcast. And you know what, she listens to the Bendy Bodies Podcast. I go in every time and I'll say, I need you to listen to episode 94. I need you to listen to the episode. And I write it down on a Post-it note, and the next time I come in, Jenna has listened to that episode.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wow.

Kate Colbert: Every single time. My previous PT, I sent her something on Instagram once about some really great information, and I think it was from something from Jeannie Di Bon or somebody, and she said, oh, I did a bunch of those courses or whatever when I first started caring for you. And so it's amazing how many of my providers, even without me realizing it, are educating themselves about EDS so they can take better care of me. and hopefully take better care of a lot of other people. And so I think that that's, that's powerful.

And you're absolutely right. Nobody in a body like this expects that our providers have any sense of what it feels like to live in a body like this, which by the way, I think it is, I wish you didn't have EDS because I wish nobody had it. but as your patient, I was blown away, when I first was able to get an appointment with you and realized, oh my gosh, this is the first time in my life and maybe will be the only time in my life that I have a doctor who walks around in a body like mine and who understands when I describe a strange sensation or a symptom or a sign, who might actually know what that feels like. and that is, that's a powerful thing.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So let's talk about patients since I was just talking about being a patient. Let's talk about your patients, your clients. So some of the people who are listening, maybe a lot of people who listen to the podcast might think of you primarily as, you know, the founder and host of the Bendy Bodies Podcast. but of course your day job, is as a physician, right? so where you're treating and advising adults and children and sometimes entire families about the clinical management of EDS and related conditions. So let's talk about all of those patients. And I know you have a coaching model where you also coach folks who have such conditions where you're not managing their, their care as their doctor. In terms of the symptoms or struggles that people are coping with, what are the top 3-ish? What are some of the top complaints?

Kate Colbert: Every time I ask you for a number, you always defy me, by the way. So anybody who's like listening, so you all should know this, like every time I ask Dr. Bluestein, give me your top 3, she gives me 9, or give me your top— yeah, that's fair. Whatever she says is always brilliant, and then I think I should have asked for the top 9, right? So that's funny. What are some of the— right, you always defy me, doc. I love it in a good way.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: What are some of the top complaints that you're hearing from people who are living with— that's so funny. Just like how EDS bodies are unpredictable, I'm gonna throw a little wrench here and I'm gonna give you 3 things.

Kate Colbert: Oh my God, I know, I know.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So I do pain, medicine. So of course number 1 is pain, and it is shocking to me to see how, you know, I mean, there's— I've seen people as young as probably 10 as clients. I'll go, you know, I mean, I've seen an 18-month-old, you know, I saw the parents, of course, as a client, which is what I see people online. They don't have to come for an appointment. And like you said, I don't manage their medications. I don't manage their care. I just give them information that's, you know, like a one-on-one conversation and one-on-one customized information. So, but I mean, I've seen young, young people with pain everywhere, and that's really tragic.

But, you know, there's people that I can think of— this one young man that I saw who was 10 at the time that I saw him, and I'm mentioning him because I saw him such a long time ago. He was one of my first patients very early on, and he had pain everywhere. And mom and dad said, everywhere? And he said, yes, everywhere. And then he thought about it, and he said, maybe not my eyelids. Bless his heart, you know.

Kate Colbert: For me, it's always, if you ask me, where does it not hurt? And I think about it, it's me. I've said out loud, maybe the tip of my nose.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Wow. Wow.

And with this boy, he's now like 16, 17. And last I talked to mom, because mom's also a patient, as you said, lots of families, he's doing great, living a normal, normal teenage life, you know. And as I've mentioned on the last podcast, like, I definitely have not, you know, healed everyone by any means. I'm not even going to use the word cure, of course, because that's not what we do. We try to improve functional capacity, improve quality of life, make it so that you can do the things that you want to do. But, in this person's case, he's doing normal 16-, 17-year-old things. He's going to school and he still has aches and pains, but he's not in pain like that. It's not pain with a capital P, it's pain with a lowercase p. So, that's the first thing.

The second thing is fatigue. And, I mean, there is no question about this and it is bone-searing. Cannot get my muscles to cooperate, you know, like fatigue. Like, again, I think because I've seen so many people now, it just, it starts to really like sink in how bad these symptoms are and how difficult people are experiencing life. And I wish that I did have a magic wand that I could just wave because that would just be amazing. So I'm working on that also. So, so fatigue is definitely a huge, huge challenge. And in a lot of cases, they'll have—

Kate Colbert: I have a magic wand right here.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yay! So there's a story behind this that I want to share, but for anybody who's watching on YouTube, I actually have a collection of magic wands. And now that I know that Dr. Bluestein needs one, I may be sending her one in the mail.

Kate Colbert: Yes, I need one. I need one. I will take it to my clinic and I will tap the root.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: You could be the magic EDS fairy.

Kate Colbert: Yes. Oh my gosh, I love that. I've never owned one. I should— okay, I love that. I cannot tell you how much I love that. That's amazing.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So, so yeah, so fatigue is a tough symptom. I mean, it is, it is definitely a challenging thing to treat. Not that, not that we don't often, you know, make good strides and really improve that symptom, but that's, but that's a tough one.

And the third one I would say is gastrointestinal symptoms. So again, it's the whole GI tract from the top to the bottom. So it's difficulty swallowing, frequent heartburn, you know, gastroparesis, which is slow movement, slow emptying through the stomach, SIBO, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, because things are, you know, not emptying the way they should. Sometimes they get like intermittent partial small bowel obstructions, which cause severe abdominal pain. People get abdominal pain, bloating, food intolerances, diarrhea, constipation, difficulty getting stool out could be related to pelvic floor problems, whatever. So, but I would say GI problems are number 3.

Kate Colbert: So, wow. Yeah. Yeah. It's a, it's a party. It's just so much fun.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Isn't it? It's a party. Yes. It is such a party.

Kate Colbert: As Dr. Chip Norris said on the stage at an EDS conference a couple of years ago, he started his talk with, this disease really sucks. And everyone in the audience just started clapping. It's not what we expected to be his opening remark. And, and he wasn't wrong. That's, that's, that's true.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That is true.

Kate Colbert: So let's talk about— so you talked a little bit about a patient who came in with pain everywhere, who was able to really sort of dull that pain through, through the treatment plan that you were able to offer. So let's talk about things that are working. So, so, you know, we talked about hope, and I think it's really important for folks who are listening to know that there are a lot of things that are working, that are making people's lives more adapted to this condition, less discomfort. So what's working? So when you think about some of the big success stories among your patients, what interventions seem to have the most promise and why?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So first, I'm gonna share my acronym, MENSPMMS, and maybe we'll link another source of information about this, but the letters quickly stand for movement, education, nutrition, sleep, psychosocial modalities, medications, and supplements. So you notice there's 3 Ms, and medications is last because usually by the time people have come to me, they've been on a ton of different medications. And sometimes the one of the first things that I do is work on stopping some of those. As, as the brilliant— I love her so much— as the brilliant Dr. Heather Tick said recently on a podcast interview, I think it was number 95, she said, how much did we— or she asked me, how much did you learn in medical school about stopping medications? And I was like, nothing.

Kate Colbert: Yeah, I remember her saying that.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And then she asked, how much did you learn about starting medications? A lot. So people all the time prescribe medications and never think what's the endpoint. And we just keep adding and adding and adding. And there's excipients in those medications, or the quote-unquote inactive ingredients, excipients, that those of us with mast cells that, again, are part of the immune system, white blood cells in the immune system that react to foreign infections and chemicals and things like that. If they get hyperactive, then we want to minimize those excipients. So, you know, that's one thing that I definitely often will do is start with, okay, let's get rid of some of these medications and supplements. Because I think sometimes that, that can be a huge part of the problem.

But I think that the most pivotal thing for me, I'm going to share a story about mast cell-directed therapies. So almost exactly 2 years ago, I was asked to give a talk on soft tissue pain and mast cell activation syndrome at a mast cell conference. And I thought about it and I was like, I'm not sure I'm the right person to give this talk. Like, I'm like, do I know enough about this topic? So I contacted the organizers and I'm like, I'm not sure I'm the right person to do this talk. And they said, you are the most knowledgeable pain medicine physician coming to this talk. And they had already asked me to do another presentation that I had agreed to. And they said, we really think that you're the right person to do this talk. I said, okay. Okay, I'll do my best. So I read and read and read and read and read. And as I was reading, the light bulbs were just going off and the fireworks, and I was like, oh my God, you know, I came across articles like, you know, mast cells, the gatekeepers of pain. What? I was like, wow, I like had no idea, not to that degree anyway.

So I started changing the way I treated my patients and started directing my therapy a lot more at mast cell activation syndrome, even if their symptoms weren't 100% consistent. I mean, sometimes someone walks in the room and you're like, oh my God, this is absolutely florid MCAS. And other times it's like, ah, I can make a weaker case for it, but maybe. But I just, I started making more of a shift and, you know, okay, let's identify the triggers, which is, you know, step one. Let's talk about the triggers. It's not necessarily to eliminate everything, but, you know, even simple things like drinking out of stainless steel or glass and avoiding plastic. You and I have talked about plastic, you know, using air purifiers, avoiding fragrances, off-gassing of things like sofas, you know, getting fresh air. Our buildings are so tightly sealed now. So xenobiotics are a big problem. We're exposed to all of these pesticides, etc. So we want to, we want to think about those exposures first, and then we want to think about therapies.

So in terms of therapies, antihistamines are very, very important. So we have the H1 antihistamines, first generation and second generation. So first generation is things like Benadryl or diphenhydramine, and second generation are the non-sedating antihistamines like cetirizine, fexofenadine, etc. And then we have the H2 antihistamines, which are famotidine, otherwise known as Pepcid, cimetidine. I think right now those are the only two available in the US. There was ranitidine, but that got taken off the market. So H1 and H2 antagonists can be very, very helpful. What often happens is people are not taking enough. And again, this is information, not advice. So please consult with your own health— I'm going to give this caveat of consult with your own healthcare practitioner. But oftentimes you have to go a higher dose than over-the-counter. So I'll give an example. I went on a trip and I got eaten alive by no-see-ums. And I was itching my skin. It was bleeding like for months afterwards. And it was awful. I couldn't sleep. I was so miserable. And even though, you know, obviously at that point I wasn't getting bit anymore, but my mast cells were so activated that I couldn't get them to calm down. I went to the dermatologist and they said, I want you to take Zyrtec and I want you to take 4 times the over-the-counter dose, 2 in the morning, 2 at night. I was like, what? And that finally, that finally worked. So, so sometimes we have to dose these a little differently. Like I said, twice a day instead of once a day. And sometimes it's a matter of finding the right antihistamine. It could be a prescription one, non-prescription one, and trial and error, unfortunately, sometimes is necessary. But those things are really helpful.

Cromolyn is another medication that is very, very helpful for the right people. It is a very, very old drug. I say this to patients all the time. I am nearing 60. I'm in my late 50s, and I was prescribed cromolyn when I was a kid. So, that's how old this drug is. I was prescribed cromolyn for my asthma. So, cromolyn is available as a nebulizer, as a nasal inhaler. You can put it in your eyes and your ears, but that's hard to find actually. You can also take it as a, like, a liquid that you put in, like, a glass of water and you take before meals. Cromolyn helps stabilize mast cells, so it can be very effective mostly where you locally put it, although I've had plenty of patients say that they've gotten wide, wide systemic effects from the cromolyn that they're just, like, ingesting orally. So I've had patients that came on, like, 8 drugs and they started cromolyn and they were able to stop a bunch of things. So, yeah. So, again, nothing works for everyone, but sometimes that works beautifully.

And then, the last thing I'm going to mention right now is quercetin. It's spelled Q-U-E-R-C-E-T-I-N. And, that's a supplement that— it's a flavonoid and that can stabilize mast cells just like there are a ton of things that can activate mast cells. So, knowing what these things are and taking a curious mindset is very important. I suffer from anxiety. When we are more anxious, it activates our mast cells, and that makes our symptoms worse. And this is physiologic, by the way. So whatever we can do to try to help our anxiety can also help our mast cells. And that's not to blame anyone. Again, I, I am definitely, you know, lifelong anxiety sufferer. So, it's definitely though a tool that we can use that has very little side effects, like thinking about, okay, well, can we do some mindfulness breathing, activating our vagus nerve in some fashion? So other things like that can be really helpful.

Kate Colbert: That's great. By the way, the activating the vagus nerve, so singing is really great.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh yes. If you're not a good singer, so humming. Humming is really great. In fact, if I have a neuro crisis, and PT, my physical therapist, know to just get in front of me and they start humming and tell me, hum with me, and I'll hum with them. And that, that can be really helpful.

Kate Colbert: And then singing was kind of an accidental finding for me. I'm not— I don't— I am a musician, but, you know, I, I can play you a beautiful song on a flute, but you don't want to hear me sing. And so I don't sing for fun, but now I sing for healthcare. So I've noticed that I can be headed somewhere in the car feeling very sick, whether it's my POTS flaring or, you know, sort of MCAS stuff going on. But if I'm listening to music I really love and I'm singing along, by the time I get there, I feel much, much better. And I used to think, oh, that's just, you know, adrenaline or whatever, you know, mind over matter. But over time, I've begun to realize, no, I'm literally— my body is functioning better after I sing. And so that sort of activating into the vagal tone and whatnot is very interesting stuff. So, yeah, that's great.

And I love hearing you say that, that these, sort of mast cell, directed therapies are starting to really help patients with a lot of things. That's— I, I think that when I was first diagnosed, I remember mast cell was sort of the last thing people thought about. It was sort of an afterthought. And now I'm hearing more and more experts saying that they, they believe that, that when it comes to sort of the the monster that is EDS, that, that it's possible that MCAS is the head, not the tail. Oh yeah. And if we focus on MCAS, that we can then start, really sort of seeing, systemic improvements everywhere, which is exciting to think about.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. okay. So let's talk a little bit more, about, I want to keep talking about your day job as a doctor. So you're a specialist among specialists, right? So, so when I explain to people, I always just call you my EDS doctor. And some of my other doctors are like, I don't know what that means. And so, you know, I said, well, she's a, you know, she's a pain medicine doctor. She's an anesthesiologist by training. She specializes in treating patients with connective tissue disorders. But for a listener who doesn't really know how a quote-unquote EDS doctor might work with the rest of their team, like their primary care doctor or their allergist, immunologist, or neurosurgeon or cardiologist or whoever the case may be, can you tell us a little bit about how you fit into the patient's healthcare team and how you help other doctors do their jobs better by sort of shining the EDS-filtered light on the work of caring for those patients?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I would say two major ways. One is as a translator. So, you know, nowadays we are bogged down with so much information, right? And it can be so hard to sort out hype from, you know, what's actually going to help and interpret this information. So challenging. So, I feel like by having somebody that can act as a translator can be really, really helpful. And, the other way is by playing detective. You know, a lot of people, they don't have the— a lot of physicians, I should say, they don't have the time to play detective. So, I can often do the groundwork for them or that's kind of the role I might play on that person's team. And sometimes, I've discovered things that have been missed by other people on their team that maybe they would be more likely to have caught, like micronutrient deficiencies, severe anemia, florid inflammation, autoimmune conditions, you know, things that, you know, again, are helpful clues to, well, how can we get this person to feel better?

So I feel like by playing detective and by playing interpreter, I can help people get better care because my goal is to help them get better care from the people that they're seeing and not seeing me, you know, indefinitely, but being able to work with the other doctors that they have. And also, I guess I should add a third thing, you know, teaching them how to be a better healthcare consumer. So, you know, you've mentioned some of the things that you've done, and I think the key there is showing reasonableness. Patients sometimes go into an appointment with a brand new doctor already angry. And it's, yeah, and it's really, I get it. Like, I understand why, but you also, it's helpful to think about how that person is gonna feel from the very beginning that they can't win, that they can't— there's nothing that they're gonna be able to do that's going to, you know, make you feel like that was a successful encounter. So I think, you know, whenever possible, I try to teach people things like how to communicate better. Like, if they'll say something to me and I say, you know, I think if you're going into another appointment, I would recommend phrasing it like this, because I want to try to give them a skill set in communication that might help them to get better care. Because I mean, I think one of the huge problems that we have is doctors don't understand how patients think and patients don't understand how doctors think.

Kate Colbert: So I think we need to— your book, Think Like a Marketer, is a brilliant book. And I, you know, as you know, I have ADHD. I rarely finish a book. I've started a lot of books, but I don't always finish them. But I finished your book. I finished your book. It's a great book. So I think, you know, teaching people how that doctor is probably thinking, and this is how you can approach that in a way that's more likely to be successful, I think is the third thing that I try to help people with.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, I love that. I love that. I will be thinking of you that way now as a translator and a detective. And I, and I love that. And I think you're right. I mean, again, I'm, I'm biased. And so anybody who sort of knows what I do in my day job, I own a communications consulting company. And, so I'm a communicator by, by trade and I'm trying, trying to figure out how to help people communicate more effectively. I teach courses on persuasive communications, how to get people to do what you want them to do. Right. And at the end of the day, that's kind of the doctor-patient relationship, right? So patients, we want doctors to help us, right? We want them to do what we want them to do for us. And doctors want patients to give them the information they need, answer the questions clearly, help them arrive at a diagnosis and treatment plan, and then be compliant with that treatment plan, and then come back and tell them how it's going so it can be tweaked over time, right? So we have needs of one another. The patient and the provider have needs of one another. And if we can figure out how to communicate more clearly so that we can get each other there, I, you know, I've, I've had some difficulty in my life getting care where I've had doctors who I thought were providing poor bedside manner in the moment.

And I, and I, I've shared a story of being rolled into surgery and having a surgeon who, who I thought was treating me disrespectfully sort of in the moment. And I realized this is not in anyone's best interest if I get rolled into an operating room and put under anesthesia while there was this sort of weird tension between me and the doctor. But I was scared and I had a really important question and I needed a modification to my anesthesia protocol that for my health outcomes needed to be addressed in that moment. And I wasn't being listened to. And I said to that doctor— it was a neurosurgeon and anesthesiologist in the room at the time— and I said, hang on a second. I said, last I checked, we were all on Team Kate. Yeah. And unless I'm misunderstanding something about the goal that we are trying to accomplish here today with this surgery, I think we all want the same thing. I think we all want good health outcomes for me. And I looked at both doctors in the eyes and then came back to the doctor who was being a little bit fussy and looked him in the eyes and I said, yes. And I waited and you could literally physically see it register for him, and him— you know, he was just ready to do a really important job as a neurosurgeon, right? Like he was focused on what needed to happen in that operating room. And so he was just not ready for the conversation we were going to have. And I could see him get disarmed. Like I could see him take a deep breath and like, and take a breath and then reach forward.

And this is actually sort of related to, I had a letter from you from, from one anesthesiologist to another with some information about the protocols that should be altered. And he took the letter back that he had just shoved into my husband's hand and saying he didn't need to read it and he knew about EDS. And he took it back and he stood there and he read it and then he asked a couple of clarifying questions and he turned to the anesthesiologist and asked her a question or two and then said, okay, Kate, I'm going to let you and Dr. So-and-so sort of work out the rest of this and I'll see you in the operating room. And we were able to have that breakthrough and I was able to get the vital care that I needed and I deserved because we communicated our way through that solution.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. and in that moment, whether it feels fair or not, it was my job or my opportunity as the patient to broker that conversation for my benefit. and so I think that that's, that's really, that's really important for people to understand.

Kate Colbert: I love, and, and my advice to people would be, we don't in the United States have integrated healthcare in the way that we would like, right? People like to talk about places that you, you know, places where you've trained, like Mayo Clinic, and wish that, that we had that everywhere where, you know, all the different specialists were coming into the room and talking about the one patient case and it was truly interdisciplinary care. And that unfortunately doesn't really happen anywhere, frankly. but what I'm finding is that I'm the one common— as the patient, I'm the common element of every one of those relationships, right? So I have a cardiologist and my EDS doctor and my primary care doctor and my dermatologist and my whatever. And I can help them. I can help you all talk to each other through me. So you recently said something to me about ask your— tell your cardiologist that I have a hunch about this and ask them what they think about that, right? And then I often do the same thing with you and with other doctors where I'll come, I'll come in and I'll say, okay, so my neurosurgeon said this really interesting thing. I'm wondering what you think about that, or he or she had this question for you. And you all have come to a place where you're literally sending me like a carrier pigeon between all of you, right? And I'm delivering these messages. Dr. A is wondering about this. Hey, Dr. B, what do you think about that? And suddenly I'm getting better care because I'm helping you all communicate to one another through me.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes. And letting me be that sort of conduit, which I think is really exciting. As close as we might get to interdisciplinary medicine, though I am fortunate to have doctors who actually do sometimes pick up the phone or call each other, which is really great.

Kate Colbert: Okay. So 100 episodes. So let's talk about, as we kind of wrap up this momentous centennial episode, let's talk about a little bit more about the podcast and the future of the podcast. So I know that 100 episodes is, is a lot, and that the first— I know a lot of podcasters, and I know that the first 100 episodes, are the hardest, and that most hosts who make it to this huge milestone, become game changers. That 100 episodes quickly become 200 and 300 and 500 and 750, or whatever the case may be. and that when it comes to a podcast like yours, you're not just changing the game. You know, you're bringing medical authorities to the microphone to talk about really consequential issues. And you're talking about the health and the scientific understanding and the medical treatment of EDS. I think that a game-changing podcast like this can inevitably become a life-changing podcast and even a life-saving podcast, which is a power and a privilege that you carry. And I thank you for that.

As you look to the future, what do you hope to accomplish with the Bendy Bodies Podcast? And who do you hope to educate and validate, inspire, support through the important work that you're doing here?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, that's amazing. First of all, thank you. And, and I hope to have many, many, many more episodes because, my wish list for topics grows faster than I can record them. I mean, you know, it's funny because people will say, what about this, what about this? And I love getting those suggestions, by the way.

Kate Colbert: Yeah.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: But I keep adding them to the list, and it's like, you know, I don't know if I'll ever get to the point where, yeah, if I have enough support that I can record and release multiple episodes a week. It's like there's unlimited topics.

Kate Colbert: Job security.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly, exactly.

I really— my, my biggest goal is to improve care for people living with symptomatic joint hypermobility. By educating healthcare professionals and inspiring them to help this population of people who are so deserved of this care and who are living with an unbelievable burden of symptoms that most healthcare professionals just cannot possibly fathom. And I hope to, to support and just collaborate with nonprofit organizations like EDS Guardians and help them raise more money so that they can work on their mission and their vision and spreading the word about these conditions, because they're so much more common than most people realize and impact so many people's lives.

And, and I said this recently at— can't remember if it was at the conference that I was just speaking at, but, you know, I feel like this is— oh, I said it, I for sure said it at the dinner the night before with the team. I said, this is a public health emergency. I really believe this, by the way. I feel like before COVID, yeah, hypermobility, connective tissue disorders, like this was a problem. But in this, you know, COVID, post-COVID— I'm doing air quotes around the post-COVID because you know when people still get it— era, this is potentially like pivotal for having enough people to do the jobs to keep society running because young people are the ones that are sadly affected the most. And so we need to be able to identify them, give them the support that they need, help them when they get sick so that their immune system comes back online as quickly as possible, identify immune deficiencies if they have it so that we can support them, you know, through that, and give them the kind of care that they need so that they can have a meaningful, healthy adulthood. Because these conditions affect every single aspect of a person's life, every aspect. It affects their ability to do their job. It affects their ability to do their activities of daily living, their ability to interact with other people in their life and have any kind of quality of life.

So, you know, I think that for healthcare professionals to know that this is truly meaningful work, and if you take an interest in taking care of people with symptomatic joint hypermobility, it actually will be really, really rewarding. You just have to start and just take one step at a time and not get too overwhelmed and just like figure out, okay, what are some manageable things that I can start doing? Like telling people about the podcast. Like, that's so easy, right? And so just start doing those and try to get more information and more knowledge. And just— they're— I mean, they're doing their best. They're— I really think they are. I really think they're doing their best. You can save a lot of time in the visits by telling them about the podcast because you can say, go listen to this, let's do a follow-up in a month or whenever it might be, and, you know, and then let's talk about the remaining questions that you have at that time.

So I'm excited about the future, and I hope that we cover lots and lots of additional exciting topics. I hope that there's lots of great research on the horizon to talk about because, you know, I feel like so often I'm saying it depends, it depends, it depends, you know, because we need more data for so many things. But I really think that we are going to get there.

Kate Colbert: That's great. And, you know, I think the research really is starting to accelerate. I look at research that's funded by various sources, whether it's NIH or good folks at smaller organizations like the EDS Research Foundation and the Ehlers-Danlos Society is funding research these days. And so it's pretty amazing. I can't get over— I actually have a really great article sitting here on my desk that I've been marking up with a highlighter and a pen that's been really helpful. There's just more information than there ever has been. It's not enough, but, but I do think we're headed in the right direction.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So as we close, what is your advice for us, Dr. Bluestein, in terms of those of us who are listening? How can we as patients, caregivers, advocates, medical professionals, you know, how can we do our part to ensure that the world of EDS awareness and care is better, that patients with these conditions are better respected and served by the time that you release episode 200. How can we help?

Kate Colbert: I think that like with any community, it's really helpful to represent the community in a good way. So, you know, if you're a bicyclist, you know, it's very important to, you know, be respectful of, you know, be in the bike lane and don't be, you know, you want to represent the community well. So I think when it comes to EDS, you know, like we talked about, like explaining things in a way to really help the healthcare professionals understand you and helping your caregivers understand you and, and asking questions like, what information would help you help me? You know, ask— if we all listen more, probably that might be, you know, helpful. so, so I think that, that that's one thing.

And bringing up EDS and HSD in conversations is is fascinating, actually. I end up like, I'll go to a dinner with somebody and all of a sudden, like, like, I don't know, I'll say some little thing and next thing I know they're like, oh, well, I'm double-jointed and I have this and I have that. And but they had no clue about EDS or HSD, none whatsoever. And so they're like, what? You know, and they're just, you know, they're starting to really take in that information. So, so bring it up. You could actually really help someone by bringing up this information and by really seeking to, like, you know, understand what someone else is going through and then sharing your story. I mean, it really helps to share our stories. That really helps a lot.

And then lastly, tell people about the podcast because, you know, it's free. First of all, the whole, the whole goal is to make this as accessible as possible. So it's on tons and tons of different platforms. There's a lot of different ways, as Kate said, a lot of different ways to get in touch. so please, please, please tell everyone you know about the podcast. Let me know what you like, what you're finding helpful. Let me know what you don't like. If there's things that you're like, no, I didn't think that was good, or, you know, if you have suggestions for guests, if you have suggestions for topics, you know, those are the things that I think would be really, really helpful.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wow, thank you. I mean, that's really great. I love that about the fact that while in many ways the insights that are offered on Bendy Bodies have been made possible by your own connections and all of your colleagues and providers and scientists who have insights about EDS that you have brought to the microphone, but that the podcast itself, I'm guessing, as it has become this and, you know, and listeners are connecting you to different people. And I, and I love that. And ultimately, while this is— I'm so grateful to you, and I know, you know, thousands and thousands of us are so grateful to you for doing this important work and carrying this sort of banner forward to have these conversations on the airwaves in this way, that in some ways this really has been a community-created podcast because so many people have come to the microphone, so many folks are sending you their advice and tips and saying, here's an idea for a topic for a podcast. And, and you've been listening.

And I love that, you know, that, that, that's really, I think, maybe the theme and maybe we sort of end it there as we're celebrating 100 episodes is that listening to the Bendy Bodies Podcast can make a world of difference in individual lives and in this community as a whole. Doctors and providers listening to patients better will enable better outcomes. Patients listening to their providers and scientists and doing their own research and listening to one another will provide for a better experience. Caregivers, everyone in the lives of people who have these conditions listening and trusting and believing the patients when they tell you what they're going through. We all end up better if we start by just committing to listening. Listen. And here we are. And thank you for the opportunity and giving us the chance to listen so far to 100 episodes of the Bendy Bodies Podcast. Congratulations so much, Dr. Bluestein. If I had a cupcake, we could celebrate.

Kate Colbert: It would need to be a gluten-free cupcake and maybe vegan and dairy-free. And of course, no artificial colors. Right, right. Which in that frosting, because, you know, webcast. But congratulations. Which eliminates, of course, a lot of— yeah, a lot of cupcakes. But before we say our final goodbyes here, it would— I feel like it wouldn't be a Bendy Bodies Podcast episode without a hypermobility hack.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh yeah.

Kate Colbert: Yeah. Because listeners love the hacks. People love the hacks, they're very important. So Dr. Bluestein, do you have a hypermobility hack to share with me?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I do. So this one is kind of timely. I've been traveling a lot, so I am a, you know, a chronically ill entrepreneur, and I've been traveling a lot on business. And so I'm headed to London this weekend, but I just got back from back-to-back trips to Boston, Oakland, Boston. So, and travel is really, really hard on my body, as it is for a lot of people with any sort of chronic illness, but especially things like EDS. And so my, one of my big hacks right now is, if I could put it in two words, it is pack heavy. So we've been trained, I think, in our lives like that, like, you know, you should, when you travel, you should, you know, pack light, you know, travel light, right? Right. Travel light. And to the point that we almost feel like that there's like, that's a virtue. People love to brag about like, I went on a 7-day trip to Europe or whatever else with just a backpack, right? And that somehow that makes them a better person than the person who took a big suitcase, right? But when you have a dynamic disability, you have complex multi-systemic illness, you don't know what you're gonna need. You don't know what supplements, what medications, how many pillows, how many neck braces, what other sort of comfort items you're going to need. So pack heavy.

So I pack heavy in a couple of big ways. One, I have the Southwest Airlines credit card because on Southwest Airlines bags fly free, and each bag— your first 2 bags are free, and each bag can weigh 50 pounds. So without spending anything extra, I can take between my carry-ons and my two checked bags, it is not unusual for me to take 150 pounds worth of luggage on a trip. Okay, which creates its own problems, but I'll get there. So I also take my husband, who is a really great Sherpa who does not have EDS, so he can sort of move these things around. I, so I take everything that I can. I have a luggage, one of those little luggage scales, so I max out. If I need— if I think, oh, what if I need my knee braces? What if I might need this? What if— I pack it, take it? It would be better to have it and not need it than to need it and not have it. And that's my approach to traveling.

And then I also, you know, I think that, that you should be thinking about how to take good care of yourself. So pack heavy and take everything you need, but then also reduce the burden, sort of lighten the load on your own— we always buy the luggage carts, pay for the luggage carts at the airport. So we park really close, then we go get a cart and we load it up and we go get everything checked in and whatever. And then when we come back, we get a cart. So they're usually like $8 for a luggage cart. You are worth $8. Just trust me on this. And then, and then if it's gonna be hard on your body, even if you are ambulatory and you are typically able to walk that sort of a distance, why start a vacation or a business trip with an injury or with extra exhaustion, and so I always ask when I check in my luggage, can I have a wheelchair and have somebody take me to my gate? And so I always travel with a whole bunch of $5 bills so that I can tip my wheelchair attendants, and that can make a world of difference. So pack heavy, but then, you know, lighten the burden on your body however you can. So that's my travel hack.

Kate Colbert: Love it. Love it. Yeah. I mean, you're right. But I actually had a pilot say that the other day. He was really a funny pilot. And he said, I know no one ever likes to listen to the safety information, but it's better to have it and not need it than to need it and not have it. And people listened that time. Like nobody ever listens to the safety information. So that's, I think that's a, that's a good point.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Well, thanks so much for having me on. I love when I get to guest host. It's really cool. And it's just as fun to help shine a light back on you after everything that you have done to help patients and to shine lights on your amazing guests. So thanks for the opportunity, and I will let you wrap it up.

Kate Colbert: Okay, well, you've been listening to the Bendy Bodies Podcast with the Hypermobility MD, and your guest host today was Kate Colbert. And it was so great to chat with you today, Kate, and I hope that we get to chat again for episode 200, and I know we're going to chat again before that, but, maybe we'll meet again on episode 200 as well.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sounds great. Thanks so much.

Kate Colbert: Okay, thanks. Bye.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Thank you for listening to this week's episode of the Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD podcast. Visit our new website at bendybodiespodcast.com where you can now view guest profiles and show notes with links to products and journal articles. Leave me a comment, sign up for updates, leave a review or a voicemail, and access the podcast on your favorite player, all directly from our website. You may hear your voicemail in a future episode where we answer your question or dive into your gracious feedback. Follow us on Instagram at bendy_buddies. We love seeing your posts and stories, so be a buddy and engage our community by using the hashtag bendy buddy. That's hashtag B-E-N-D-Y B-U-D-D-Y. You can also find me, Dr. Linda Bluestein, on Instagram, Facebook, Twitter, or LinkedIn at HypermobilityMD. Visit hypermobilitymd.com for information about medical services and one-on-one coaching. This podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine or other professional healthcare services, including the giving of medical advice. No doctor-patient relationship is formed. Do not disregard or delay obtaining medical advice for any medical condition you have. Opinions shared are that of the guest and do not necessarily represent the views of the host or any particular organization. Sponsorship of the podcast does not necessarily mean an endorsement. Thank you for being a part of our community, and we'll catch you next time on the Bendy Bodies Podcast.
