---
num: 3
title: "3. Preserving the Hip with Orthopedic Surgeon, Joel Wells, M.D."
date: "2020-03-12"
duration: "54m"
description: "Hypermobility can affect every joint, but perhaps the most complicated one to understand and train is the hip. With a high prevalence of hip injuries in hypermobile dancers and athletes, proper diagnosis and treatment is critical. From hip dysplasia to labral tears, dance science and medicine’s understanding of the hip continues to evolve even as we work to find the most effective ways to treat and strengthen it. \nListen in as Dr. Wells discusses his role as a hip preservationist, why educating a dancer on pathology and proper kinematics is so essential, and how hips are like baseball mitts! \nLearn more about Dr. Linda Bluestein, the Hypermobility MD, at our websites and be sure to follow us on social media: Websites: https://www.hypermobilitymd.com and www.BendyBodiesPodcast.comInstagram: @hypermobilitymd Twitter: @hypermobilityMD Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hypermobilityMD/ Pinterest: https://www.pinterest.com/hypermobilityMD/ LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/hypermobilitymd/ \nAnd follow guest co-host Jennifer Milner at the links below: Website: www.jennifer-milner.com Instagram: @jennifer.milner Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/jennifermilnerbodiesinmotion/"
tags:
 - "Exercise"
 - "Diagnosis"
 - "Treatment"
 - "Hypermobility"
audioUrl: "https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH6201815287.mp3?updated=1721669937"
videoUrl: "https://youtu.be/I6Z-ygyY7gs"
snippets: []
guests:
 - "Joel Wells, M.D"
guestImages: []
---
Dr. Linda Bluestein: Welcome to Bendy Bodies with The Hypermobility MD. This is Jennifer Milner, your guest co-host. Dr. Bluestein and I are so thrilled to have Dr. Joel Wells as our guest today. Dr. Wells is an assistant professor in the Department of Orthopedic Surgery and a comprehensive hip surgeon at UT Southwestern. He sees patients at the Sports Medicine Clinic at Richardson Plano and is also the medical director for Miles 4 Hips, an organization that supports the International Hip Dysplasia Institute. Dr. Wells had two wishes growing up: to play professional baseball and attend Tulane University School of Medicine. He was drafted by the New York Mets his senior year at Abilene Christian University and also accepted to Tulane. Being more excited about being accepted to Tulane, he made the decision to choose medical school over baseball. Dr. Wells followed his passion and earned his medical degree at Tulane University, followed by an internship in surgery at the Brigham and Women's Hospital and a residency in orthopedic surgery at Harvard Orthopedics and Massachusetts General Hospital. He then received advanced training in joint preservation, resurfacing, and reconstructive surgery through a fellowship at Washington University in St. Louis. In recent years, Dr. Wells has received numerous honors and awards, most recently being selected as the Young Alumnus of the Year for Abilene Christian University. Dr. Wells, hello and welcome to Bendy Bodies.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Hello, and, and thank you so much for this opportunity. Thank you very much.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: We are so glad to have you here today because we know that hip issues are very common in dancers with hypermobility. But first, I would love to know what got you to this point, to being the specialist. What led you to where you are today?

Joel Wells, M.D.: Well, thank you, Jen and Linda, so much for this, this opportunity. And of course, and Jen, you kind of outlined it very nicely in that I specialize in hips. And, you know, how did I come to being loving hips and wanting to help patients with hip disorders? Well, you outlined it nicely that I was an athlete. You know, I grew up being very athletic and training to be the best at things. And as, as I went through my training, I, I loved the anatomy of the hip. I love the pathology, and I also love the patients that had hip pathology. And that's why I chose hip surgery. But also the big portion of hip surgery is also non-operative care for patients with hip disorders, and I think that's very important. But I love the cradle-to-grave hip issues from patients with pediatric hips as well as sports hips and dancers' hips and everything that can go wrong with the hips and also the elderly. And so I like being able to focus on one joint because it is so complex and we are still learning about the hip.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely. So, tell us a little bit about what you do specifically and how that's different than what a typical hip doctor might do.

Joel Wells, M.D.: So, historically, most orthopedic surgeons are somewhat sports-focused, pediatric-focused, or joint replacement-focused. And I think a newer upcoming in orthopedics is a joint-specific focused specialty. And what I do in orthopedics— I actually have clinic tomorrow at Texas Scottish Rite— I do patients that are younger with hip pathologies before they need a hip replacement. And then I go to everything that's in between. And so knowing what can go wrong with the hip and trying to preserve it is very important. And so what's near and dear to my heart is trying to prevent hip pathology before it presents with arthritis.

And so of course, arthritis, once we know that a patient has end-stage arthritis, the treatment is a total hip. But my goal is trying to prevent that. And I think it's very important to understand that a lot of pathologies that lead to arthritis can be prevented because there's a mechanical reason why hips wear out.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That makes a lot of sense. Now, having been a dancer and having gone through my dance career in the '90s and into the early 2000s, I think the first time that I heard the phrase a hip preservationist was meeting you and talking to you about it. So it seems like a relatively new approach in the field. Is that fair to say?

Joel Wells, M.D.: It's extremely new, and it's actually— it's very new to actually be so kind of super specialized. In medical school, you kind of learn a little bit about everything, and then when you're learning about that, you you feel like you know a lot about everything. But once you learn about something so specific, you understand how little you knew. And I think that's very important in the hip, in that we know really so little about hip preservation. We know certain factors and certain deformities that will lead to arthritis. But can we really preserve a hip is still being investigated. All this began with Dr. Ganz and his PAO, and then also his surgical hip dislocation. As we learn more about the anatomy of the hip and the blood supply of the hip, we can treat these deformities and hopefully preserve them.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's so interesting. So rather than trying to improve the hip replacements down the line, we're trying to get to the point where we don't even need the hip replacements.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Well, yes, that's the ultimate goal. And that's something I'm fighting every single day, especially with industry, because because with industry, hip replacements are very important, right? They're a big portion of industry, especially in orthopedics. And joint replacements are a big part of basically revenue for certain companies. And preserving a hip kind of prevents that. And in a way, you are going against mainstream advice trying to preserve something.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, I could see that. I could see how that would be different. Or maybe not the first approach that some people would want to take. And I've also seen, you know, with the hips and sort of the trends with it, I mean, labral tears were not even an issue that people would deal with 20 years ago. So, even that in itself has come so far. It used to be, from my point of view, just as a dancer, it used to be a much bigger idea of, well, it's either this or it's this. And now, there are so many smaller things in between that can be done that's not quite so drastic and not quite so big. And now moving to what you're hoping for, which is not even needing to do anything because we're working preemptively on it. I love that idea.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Exactly. And I think that's the most important part, having basically a focused team for these dancers or whomever for their hip pathology. And I'm just one piece of the puzzle, but I'm also an important piece of the puzzle in order to guide them in the right direction, just like you, Jen. We work together.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, absolutely. Now, you do see a fair number of dancers, and they do have a high rate of hip dysplasia. Can you explain first to our listeners what hip dysplasia is and why there is a higher prevalence amongst dancers?

Joel Wells, M.D.: Yeah, and so hip dysplasia is something I love, and I have basically wanted to— my research and everything that I do is basically for hip dysplasia and hip impingement. Why is that? Well, number one, because those two pathologies, whether it's femoroacetabular impingement or hip dysplasia, are the number one reasons that we have hip pain and lead to arthritis. And so hip dysplasia, in a nutshell, is basically a shallower hip socket. I know some of our listeners or someone will say, hey, well, my German Shepherd or Golden Retriever had hip dysplasia. It's actually very similar because these breeds have a genetic predisposition to a shallower hip socket. And what does that do? It means it's something so simple, having a shallower hip socket, but what does it do? It leads to aberrant pathomechanics to the hip. And it can lead to early degeneration. Why? Because the mechanics of the hip are off. And the hip joint is a pure ball and socket joint. And if it's not a ball or a socket, then the cartilage is at a disadvantage because of mechanics. And so it's a properly formed socket. And so hip dysplasia in a nutshell is a shallower hip socket. And there are a lot of varieties that, you know, that, that, that I study and everything, but basically when you have a misshapen femoral socket, it can lead to earlier arthritis because of the mechanics.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: OK. And so why do you see that more in dancers?

Joel Wells, M.D.: Well, so the hip range of motion, I like to use the term Goldilocks. It's kind of like the perfect scenario. If you have too little coverage, then you have excessive motion because you have excess motion before you impinge on the other side of the joint. Think of a ball and socket joint, like a baseball in a glove. If you have a very shallow baseball glove, such as a catcher's mitt, you have more area to catch that ball. Whereas if you have an outfielder's glove, there's a lot of room in that you can easily hit on that leather. The similar aspect to the hip. And so the hip joint, if you have a very shallow socket, you have much more range of motion before one bone, the femur bone, hits against the acetabulum bone. And this can lead to impingement. Well, dancers need excessive motion because it's an amazing sport that requires that. And patients with hip dysplasia often have excessive motion because that's what their anatomy will allow them to do.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I see. So, it sounds like you're saying that hip dysplasia in general can lend itself to a more aesthetically pleasing dancer, yes?

Joel Wells, M.D.: It can. It can lead to a more aesthetically pleasing dancer that is able to do things that other dancers cannot. But at the same time, is that a healthy hip or is that a hip that will stay pain-free? That's another question.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right. We see it more commonly in dancers because it contributes to the aesthetic of dance. But that doesn't necessarily mean that they're going to be healthier or have a longer career because of that.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Exactly, yes.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Perfect. Do you see more hypermobility in your dance patients, like hypermobility in general in your dance patients, than in the general population?

Joel Wells, M.D.: Well, so that's a great question, Jen. And so to be honest with you, I probably see more hypermobile patients with hip pathology not just dancers, in all hip pathology.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, interesting.

Joel Wells, M.D.: And so I definitely think that dancers have a subgroup of hypermobility, which is somewhat helpful at one time, but it's kind of a balance. We talked about that kind of Goldilocks. But I definitely see a lot of hypermobile patients. And so every single patient I see, I am testing for hypermobility.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Interesting. So it seems that the percentage of hypermobile people you see is probably higher than the percentage of hypermobile people in the general population.

Joel Wells, M.D.: I would completely agree with that, and that's something that needs to be studied, which I am, because I am truly fascinated about it.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, that's so interesting. I can't wait to see what you find out. So how does hypermobility change how you might approach an issue?

Joel Wells, M.D.: Yeah, and so the thing is, all too often we get, especially as orthopedic surgeons or any provider, we get focused on one area, one pathology. And so I see a lot of patients that are sent to me that have what, quote unquote, normal radiographs, but their hips, for the most part, are unstable in my opinion because of their hypermobility. No one really took the time to check how they are actually hypermobile, their Beighton score. And a patient, especially a dancer, that is having hip discomfort that has normal radiographs should always be screened for hypermobility.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And do you see a fair amount of people with hypermobility that goes more extreme, like to connective tissue disorders like EDS or Marfan or that sort of thing?

Joel Wells, M.D.: I do, I do, and I have a close relationship with genetics here at UT Southwestern as well as my, my mother-in-law is a geneticist, and we have— we both have a very keen interest in hypermobile patients because, because what's unique about joints, whether it's the shoulder or the hip or the knee, is that excessive motion in a joint causes pain despite radiographic evidence of anything wrong with that. And that's because of excessive motion. And so soft tissue and ligamentous laxity is a very, very important part of joint health.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And so I know that you are a surgeon, but I also know from working with you that you do not always jump to surgery as the first solution. So what informs your cautious approach and what has brought you to that point?

Joel Wells, M.D.: Well, everything I do, you know, I try to be very evidence-based, right? And so my goal is my research is looking at outcomes, right? And so there are things that I know when I see radiographically or on exam that I know will definitely lead to some degeneration or some significant pathology that I can correct. If I see one of those, then, of course, I let the patient and their family know. But there are a lot of things that are somewhat in between that we are not fully sure. These patients are symptomatic at an early age, yet the long-term studies that we know do not necessarily mean that they're going to end up with end-stage arthritis or significant pathology that at this stage I can treat. And so in my heart, I have a very hard time putting a patient through a surgery that may help but may not help.

And so I definitely think that understanding a patient's hip pathology, whether it be treating them surgically or non-surgically, is the most important. And so I think the most important part of my job is educating patients about their hip, their hip mechanics, their pathology, their kinematics. And what can go wrong if we don't correct these.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes. Well, and you said earlier that there's so much about the hip that we still don't know. And I have seen so many hip surgeries that have complications further down the line with dancers with hypermobility. We have scarring issues. The way we regrow can be different. And so, there are so many complications that you don't necessarily anticipate. From injections or doing surgeries, you try to fix one thing and then it ends up causing complications with another. And so I would think that that would also be part of the decision-making process of, do we want to start a chain reaction here if we don't have to?

Joel Wells, M.D.: You know, you couldn't have said it better. That is phenomenal because every action has a reaction. And whether it's a simple intervention as an injection which is not benign to a surgical intervention, which is exceptionally not benign. They can have these downstream effects that these, especially these patients that I see that are very young, is that you don't want to start them on the kind of downward spiral to having chronic pain or other issues just because of this initial inciting event. And so that's why I think number one is starting with education with these patients, because every, you know, every treatment that we do is important yet has some risk. And so at the same time, we have to let patients and their families know what we're treating, and it should be a shared decision-making process.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely. And trying to look further than being well enough to do this Nutcracker, but trying to see what we can do to do the next 7 Nutcrackers.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Exactly, yes. And so, you know, dancing is such a phenomenal sport, and I love it. And I love the patients because they are, you know, dancers. They are true athletes, in my opinion, and almost to a fault. And so helping these patients understand that getting them through not just the, like you said, the first Nutcracker, but my goal is to have them having a long professional career is the most important, not just getting them to the next one.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely. That's fantastic. So it's post-dance also, right, that we want to make sure that people can be as functional as they possibly can be. And so Dr. Wells, you are a hip specialist as opposed to a general orthopedic surgeon. And what sort of things would make a dancer seek out a specialist that's doing more specific things like you are?

Joel Wells, M.D.: Yeah. And so basically, as we're becoming so advanced with medicine, we're becoming a nation of specialists. And I think that is really important, but at the same time, we can't lose our generalists to be kind of the go-to for certain things. For me, I honestly, I see the majority of my patients, of course I'm happy to see anyone, but I see almost all hip, any hip pathology. And so then, you know, 95% of the patients I see have hip pathology. And I think that's really important because seeing a generalist, yes, they can triage things, but knowing the nuances is very difficult. And as I teach residents and medical students, I don't expect them to know the nuances. This is something that you need to learn and it takes time. And so, having a specialist, whether it's a hip preservation specialist or a hip specialist or a shoulder specialist, is really important when it comes to our super specialized patients.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And are there ways that people can find a hip preservation specialist like yourself if they're not in your area or are not able to travel to come see you? A lot of people have difficulty sitting when they start developing problems with their hips and that kind of thing. So, do you have any suggestions for how somebody could find someone that would have a mindset at least on the same track as yours? Because I think that's a fantastic approach to not thinking surgery as an earlier step than is absolutely necessary.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Linda, that's phenomenal. That's kind of, besides hip dysplasia, that's my other very important thing that I want to help with in that there are a few kind of go-to places that we have, whether it's International Hip Dysplasia Institute or, you know, the internet is really important in finding physicians. And I think it has a great wealth of knowledge. At the same time, you have to take it with a grain of salt. And so I think it's very important that as us as physicians, really my goal is to show what outcomes and kind of what research is important. That should be publicly noted. And so something that's near and dear to me is actually publishing live outcomes on whether it's social media or on your webpage on treatment options. That's caught with often some controversy and also some, some debate. I definitely think when we look for a restaurant to eat at or a mechanic, there are a lot of options on the internet to find ratings and things like that. Currently, ratings of physicians or outcomes and what they do is very hard to find, and it's very difficult for patients. And so I think having a go-to website, whether it's an— it should be an unbiased website because medical knowledge is very different— that patients can go to to help find help wherever their provider may be. And that's something that I am working on currently.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's really fabulous. I think you said that really well, that we can get so much information before we go to a restaurant. Now, obviously we have to take any of these things with a grain of salt, but something as critically important, I have patients that are young and have had already multiple hip surgeries and they're not doing well. I mean, if they're coming to see me for pain management, they're probably not doing well. And maybe they did need the surgeries, but it seems like in a number of cases that they perhaps could have maybe had a different outcome, at least, you know, so far.

Joel Wells, M.D.: So, if that was, you know, not just, not just, on social media or, you know, opinion, but if that actual outcome, how that patient was objectively doing, was published and easily accessible, then I definitely think patients would benefit. And that is not currently being done basically anywhere, in my opinion.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right, absolutely. I mean, you know, if we had more of a value-based medical system where you looked at the outcomes relative to the cost, right, that would be— I know that Dr. Michael Porter talks about this a lot, that whether it's a center of excellence for headaches or hips or anything else that if you look at outcomes and what did it cost to get that outcome, that would be such a great way to actually do our healthcare. But that's unfortunately not how we're doing it right now.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Not even cost, right? And so like, it's— I think more on outcome. And so cost can be skewed because you can make things cheaper and you can make patients possibly do better short term. But, you know, I hate to use the baseball analogy. Of course, I was a baseball player, but like, you know, I did not get a scholarship or paid to strike out, right? But healthcare is very different. I get paid, honestly, I get paid and rewarded to operate no matter what.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right, absolutely.

Joel Wells, M.D.: And so I think that that needs to change in that, you know, no one gets paid to bat, you know, 100. You get paid to bat over 300 and do well. And so we need to define what our outcomes are in order to provide patients better service.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Definitely. I love that. And within the dance world, have you seen changes that make you concerned? And are there changes that you would like to see happen in the dance world?

Joel Wells, M.D.: And so, you know, I think the biggest thing is that in the dance world, especially in hip pathology, is that we now can safely get to the hip. And when I say safely, I mean not destroy, you know, neurovascular structures. But it doesn't mean patients do well. And I see a lot more patients getting scoped early on very quickly, whether their hip or other joints are being operated on, just because they, they have a possible pathology, but it may not be their underlying diagnosis. And so in the hip world, I see a lot of patients basically going into surgery too quickly, in my opinion, without really exhausting, without really that knowledge of their joint pathology.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That makes sense. And what advice would you give to hypermobile dancers as they try to stay healthy in their own career?

Joel Wells, M.D.: I love that question. And the advice I would give is, one, I want every single one of my patients to continue to dance if they can, right? But at the same time, I would never tell them to, one, stop dancing, but two, understanding their hip and understanding their joints and trying to be a better— to strengthen their hips in order to be a better dancer or to strengthen their joints. Dancing is so much more strength as it is range of motion. And so these patients often kind of lack the joint stabilizing mechanics of their hip or their shoulders or other joints. And so focusing on strengthening, not so much of their range of motion, is very important in that balance of that.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. I know Jen and I both definitely agree. And it's so hard because they want the range. They see things on social media and on quote-unquote reality TV, right? It's not really reality, but they see these things and they think, I want to be able to do that. Whether, I mean, they maybe were hypermobile, they might be hypomobile, right? So they might have actually less range, but they're going to cause some kind of injury to themselves because they see other people doing things and they're going to try to do it. That can definitely be challenging.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Yes, at the same time, but I was an athlete, and pushing yourself to the max is part of being an athlete. And that's why I love dancers. But also, at the same time, you have a coach, right? And you have a team to help you get there in a safe way.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes. And I would add also that one of the things I like about you and the way that you practice is that you will consistently send the dancers with hip issues back to their coaches, back to their teachers to do private work to fix their technique and to have them strip it down, step back, and make sure that what they're doing, they're doing right so that they're strengthening correctly and working in a really safe range. And hearing it from me to tell them to slow down is one thing, but hearing it from their doctor saying, hey, let's step back and let's do this and let's really work on the basics and then, you know, 2 months from now it's going to be so much better. It's so important and that I value that, that a doctor will do that and say that to them.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Yeah, Jen, and that's the— that's so important, right? And so I, I'm just one orthopedic surgeon, right, in a big metropolitan city, and so when I have patients that fly in to see me and from all over DFW or elsewhere, they, you know, you don't you can't discuss with the therapist right off the bat, but you know what I like to do? I like to give the therapist my email, my cell phone, so we can at least talk because it is a team effort.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely. And that's so important. I totally agree.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Because you can't just write a script saying hip dysplasia or hip impingement and expect really everyone to be on the same page. It just doesn't work like that. Right. And patient specifics just doesn't work like that. So every patient is different. And then I really feel like every patient, especially these complex hip patients and these dancers, need focused care. And the only way you can do that is really talking one-on-one.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's fabulous. I love that you share your email address with them. That's fantastic. And you just mentioned impingement again. And I thought if you could maybe go over— we talked about dysplasia. You've mentioned impingement, I think. But if you could maybe just explain again about impingement, labral tears, arthritis, just a little bit so people understand what some of these different things are because maybe they've heard these things in their doctor's office and the doctor has either said, let's do an injection, let's do surgery. If you could maybe explain what some of those things are and how people might be able to judge, in addition to what you said about looking at does their doctor produce information about outcomes either on social media or in their office even that they can ask, hey, do you have any data that you can share? Can you just explain a little bit more about those things?

Joel Wells, M.D.: Definitely, Linda, and thank you. And so, we'll start with hip impingement. And so, to be honest, as orthopedic surgeons, we are very, we're very simple men and women. And so hip impingement basically means that the hip joint, either the femur or the acetabulum, is impinging or touching one another. And so I think that term often gets used too loosely because even hip dysplasia patients can impinge on certain ranges of motion, right? And so if you're able to do certain motion activities and splits, you can technically impinge, right? But it does not mean that you have hip impingement. And so hip impingement is usually used as femoroacetabular impingement, meaning the femur and the acetabulum, or the socket side, is touching one another. But the thing is, is that touching one another can cause damage.

And you mentioned labral tears. The labrum is basically a circle around the acetabulum. It's basically a ring that is lining the acetabulum. It's an extension of the acetabular cartilage. And it serves as a bumper or a gasket, kind of a washer around the hip. And what that does is if you impinge over time, repetitive impingement, hitting one bone against the other, can cause tears or pain because of that impingement. Just because you have a labral tear does not mean you have hip impingement, and just because you are impinging does not mean you have femoroacetabular impingement. It's much more complex, but those are the simple ways to look at it, is that one bone is hitting against the other. A labral tear is that a portion of the cartilage that surrounds the socket side of the acetabulum, is torn or frayed or worn out because of some process that's causing hip pain.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That makes a lot of sense. And I guess one thing that I'm wondering is, in your practice over this, you know, whatever time period that you want to pick, do you feel like you're seeing more injuries in dancers and maybe even other athletes as people are pushing themselves harder, their dancers are doing more overstretching, oversplits, you know, things like this.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Well, without a doubt. And so I'll use— I had clinic today and I believe I had— I saw 28 hips. And so I, like I said, I purely exclusively see hips. And of that 28 hips, almost half of them they were not dancers necessarily, but they were from either yoga or other somewhat highly kind of static stretching activities. And the thing is, is that every hip is unique to that patient. And that's one reason why I love the hip so much, because hip range of motion is inherent to each patient. There's a lot of factors that go into hip range of motion. It's not just soft tissue. It's just not stretching. It is bony morphology. It's rotation. It's pelvic tilt and obliquity. All that factors into motion. And so if one person is trying to mimic another person that they may not be able to reach, then they can cause damage to the soft tissue structures in and around the hip.

And so to answer your question, people are taught from a little age when they're in elementary school that stretching is the most important part. Well, the hip is very unique. It's very different than the knee or an elbow or the wrist. It's a constrained ball-and-socket joint.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So what my dancers would say to you in all their 10 and 12 and 14-year-old wisdom is if they— maybe not my dancers because they know better now, but what a lot of dancers would say— if they want to sit in the hyper splits or the over splits and put their bottom on the floor and put their feet up on a chair, one foot in front and one foot behind up on chairs, and really sit in that oversplit, why is that bothering the hip when they're stretching their hamstrings? What does that stretch have to do with their hips is what they would like to know.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Exactly. And so that's why I think I can talk to patients till I'm blue in the face, but if I show them a model, if I show them their X-rays, then I think they really understand. And so that's why the majority of what I do daily is educating patients about their hip. And that's what I love, right? And it never gets old. I love it so much. And so it's really showing these patients that do that what their hip is doing. And, you know, you can tell them that, but unless you show them, they don't understand.

And so I really think that showing them a model— and so, a lot of these patients that have really complex hips, I always get advanced imaging. And we have a great protocol at UT Southwestern that we've developed, a low-dose CT scan. Because all these patients are actually very, very young and radiographs can be harmful throughout their life. Well, a low-dose CT scan that's just equivalent to a few X-rays can show them a perfect model of their hip. And also help them understand what is going wrong.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Interesting. So are you, are you saying that you're doing these CT scans when they are actually doing various different positionings rather than just, you know, for most of us when we've had a CT or an MRI, we're laying, you know, supine, we're like laying on our back and we're in a fairly neutral position.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Oh man, Linda, you just brought up a huge topic that I love. And so 4-dimensional CT scans— we're working on that. But so we actually, you know, I have grant research money and everything that I'm actually working closely with the engineers and the gait labs at UT Dallas. And we are actually studying these hips with hip impingement and dysplasia and getting their actual joint mechanics. Because the problem, what you just brought up, is that this CT scan, you're laying down in a CT scanner, right? It doesn't show functional motion. But if you can take a patient with their actual physical range of motion, their clinical range of motion, their actual gait data, and then also their advanced imaging, and you can mesh that all together, you could have a 4-dimensional imaging to actually show them how their hip is working and what's wrong with it. And yes, that is currently underway. And it is being done as we speak at UT Southwestern.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wow. That's really fabulous. I mean, whether people are hypermobile or not, it's so much better if you can get a much more complete picture like that.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Yeah, it's so much better to get a complete picture, but also it's so much better to understand one's hip pathology because these patients are not just, labral tears. They're not just dysplastic patients. They're much more than that. And understanding their four-dimensional aspects of their hip is the best way to fully treat them.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Definitely. And in addition to that, getting the education and explaining, showing them this 4-dimensional, I mean, that all sounds fantastic. What else can we do as individuals to improve joint health and help to preserve our own hips?

Joel Wells, M.D.: So, you know, that is joint preservation. It doesn't have to be the shoulder. It doesn't have to be the hip or the knee. But joint preservation. And honestly, the number one thing you can do for a joint is move it. And so understanding the certain motions of the hip is important, but a joint in motion stays in motion. And so it's a fine balance. And so patients often, once they stop an activity or they graduate from high school to college, they may actually become less active, and then their joints actually end up hurting more because it's not moving. And so number one, for a healthy joint, a joint in motion stays in motion. And then number two, understanding the proper motions and mechanics of that joint is number two.

And so I think I never— I try to never limit any of my patients into doing things that they love to do. And so that's my goal every single day is showing up to work trying to help patients achieve what they consider their goal in life or their quality of life. And that answer means something different to everyone. And it starts with number one, joint motion. There are some supplements and things that we're studying. There are some okay randomized trials that are okay for joint health. But the thing is with the hip, and I know this is a big topic on the hip, is that the thing, whether it's stem cells or supplements, the problem with the hip and what I love about the hip is that it's usually mechanical, right? It's not necessarily biologic. There are some things that I see that are biologic that cause pathology, but the majority of things are not. It's mechanical. And so it's understanding the mechanics of your hip. And if they're significantly different from the normal population, correcting those mechanics, then that can provide the better joint health.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely. And I will say also, I was speaking to Lisa Howell about hips. She's a physiotherapist from Australia who plays a large role in the dance medicine world as well. And she and I were talking about hips specifically and dancers struggling with turnout and rotation and extension and all these things. And she said she had seen so many teen dancers who have had X-rays or whatever kind of imaging they've done, and they've been told, well, look at your pictures. You're never going to get more turnout. You're never going to do this. You're never going to do that. And she said 9 times out of— well, 95 times out of 100, let's say, she would look at them and say, "That's just not true. What we're looking at is not biological. We're looking at mechanical," just like what you just said. And there are very few X-rays or images that she would look at and categorically say, "Hey, we need to move in a different direction." So it's so important to know what they want and to be able to give them the tools to try to achieve that and to say, "Hey, let's see what the mechanical issues might be that are going on." So I love that.

Joel Wells, M.D.: I love that answer. It's so— that's so true, Jen. And so honestly, you can never tell a patient or a dancer what they can and can't do by a static X-ray. Right. So many people do. But an X-ray is a two-dimensional representation of a four-dimensional object. And you can't stomp on someone's dreams. You can't tell them that they can't do something just from a 2-dimensional representation of a 4-dimensional object. Amen.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Are there any guidelines that you can give our listeners in terms of— I'm thinking about labral tears specifically. Is there anything in terms of like, you know, obviously we have the caveat that this is medical information, not advice. You know, obviously we're speaking to whoever's listening and cannot provide individual information, but are there any in terms of like location of the labral tear, how much of the labrum might be torn? Because I feel like that's an area of a lot of confusion. And when they get a recommendation that, yeah, we should go in and clean up this torn labrum, if you can provide any information about that, that would be fabulous.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Yeah, Linda. And so number one, I think if anyone is diagnosed with a quote unquote labral tear that is young in a dancer and that wants to continue to dance, I would recommend number one, and this is in my practice, and I don't think anyone would actually argue this, is that they should see a hip-specific physician, whether it's a physical medicine and rehab, orthopedic surgeon, or someone that specializes in hips. And so that's number one. I think they should get to someone that understands hips and can honestly triage them as necessary. Yes. Because patients that are young, normal patients, in our age groups that we are talking about should not have labral tears, in my opinion. And so just because they maybe have radiographic evidence or a radiologist read a labral tear may mean they may not even have a labral tear, to be honest with you. They may not have the proper imaging to diagnose that.

And then two, if they do, it is best to see a specialist. And so I don't think anyone would argue that. With regards to, you know, what should be done with the labral tear or, you know, after that, it is much more complex than that. And so that's why I really think that if someone recommends, hey, you need to have a surgery for this labral tear, it is never bad to have a second opinion. And I— sure. Yes. Even as a surgeon, I often think it is good for patients because that's part of the educational process, right? Having patients understand their pathology and see providers that can kind of helpfully help educate them. And so I would also recommend they seek a second opinion if someone recommends surgery.

And then lastly, so what are, what are some guidelines for, for labral tears and things like that? There are some guidelines currently for femoroacetabular impingement, but I'll tell you that these are— I don't know if you've read many guideline studies and things like that— these are very basic. Why are they basic? Because I don't know if you've ever sat on a panel trying to create guidelines. Well, guidelines are very difficult because we always stratify things according to the current literature and what kind of evidence base we have. And so the beginning of this talk, we talked about this is all fairly new. And so we do not have level 1 evidence to support a lot of the things we do. And that's why I think seeing multiple opinions is important, but also seeing a specialist that only deals with their hip pathology is very important. And so, to answer your question and not to kind of sidestep it, I think number one, you should see a hip specialist. Number two, you should seek a second opinion or even a third opinion. And then lastly, the current guidelines, although they are great for standard femoroacetabular impingement, they may not pertain to dancers and other kind of subspecialty populations.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, that's great. And what are some practical steps that hypermobile dancers can take to increase the longevity of their career?

Joel Wells, M.D.: So, you know, I, I think number one is listening to your hip and listening to your body. And so, you know, when things start, you start feeling something that, you know, I think it's best to be seen sooner than later. Okay, and so I think that's very important in that you don't want to be seeing someone after they've been having pain for 4 years and now they can't dance and then they want to get back to dancing. I think seeing those patients that, you know, 4 years previously is the most important because I think that's where the management, that's where the changes can occur.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, that makes sense. And for just people in general who are interested in more information about hip preservation? Maybe they've had surgery, maybe they haven't had surgery. Are there— do you have any other advice that, that you would give those people?

Joel Wells, M.D.: Yes, and so I'm actually working on— I'm medical director for Miles for Hips right now, and I've been blessed with this opportunity, and my goal for that is actually to provide an unbiased educational area for hip pathology. And so there are a lot of resources out there, but number one, I think seeing a hip specialist is very important if you're having hip pain. And then also working on International Hip Dysplasia Institute as well as Miles for Hips, having a safe place for patients to go that is unbiased. And so social media is phenomenal for, for, for some news and things, but sometimes it comes with, with bias. And so my goal with Miles for Hips online is to help provide an unbiased, safe opinion for patients. They can seek out whether it's a surgeon, whether it's a provider, or information about their hip.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Fabulous. And anybody can go to Miles for Hips, and we'll have a link on the Bendy Bodies website, but anybody can join or participate in those conversations?

Joel Wells, M.D.: Anyone. Yes. Anyone's welcome to join. And it is building, and it's definitely going to be a great, great thing. But the mission, in my opinion, is providing good education for patients with hip pain, period. And so an unbelievable unbiased, safe, evidence-based opinion. Fantastic.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Do you have anything else that you would like to add? Can you also let people know where they can find you?

Joel Wells, M.D.: Yes, and so, you know, I just want to, one, thank you, Jen and Linda, for this amazing opportunity and that this is near and dear to my heart and what I wake up every morning wanting to help. And I love patients with hip pathology, especially dancers, because it is a true sport and I want to help. But too, you know, you can find me, of course, you can Google me, Joel Wells, MD. I'm very reachable, you know, anytime. And you can find me on social media or my webpage at UT Southwestern. And then also Miles for Hips is a great resource. It's a collaboration of phenomenal people that just have a goal of helping patients with hip pathology. And that's just Miles for Hips. And then lastly, you know, thank you guys so much again for this opportunity.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, we are so grateful for you being here and the work that you are doing and being willing to speak with us. Yes. It's absolutely fabulous. And just so everybody knows, Miles for Hips is the number 4. So it's Miles, M-I-L-E-S, and then the number 4, hips. And we will have links in the show notes so everyone will be able to find you to get more information because this is such a critically important topic, especially because it affects so many young people.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Yes. And I want to say that all this for Miles for Hips and everything is completely voluntary, right? I am the medical director. And everyone that's on the board just only does it because, because they want to help, right? And we have no financial incentive, and I think that's really important when you come to an unbiased opinion.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely, absolutely. That makes perfect sense. So, well, thank you so much for coming on today, Dr. Wells. And you all have been listening to Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD. And today our guest has been Joel Wells, MD, orthopedic surgeon specializing in joint preservation, resurfacing, and reconstruction. As medical director of Miles for Hips, Dr. Wells focuses on prevention, early diagnosis, and innovative treatment options to minimize the long-term impacts of hip dysplasia. Check out their website for more information, and please go to bendybodies.org for links to some of the research that Dr. Wells has done, Miles for Hips, and where he can be found at UT Southwestern. And this podcast is for informational purposes only and is not a substitute for medical advice. Please see your own medical team prior to making any changes to your healthcare. The Bendy Bodies original music is by Andrew Savino, and sound editing is by Rhett Gill. Thank you for tuning in, and we will see you next time on Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD. Thank you so much, Dr. Wells, and our guest co-host today, Jennifer Milner.

Joel Wells, M.D.: Thank you. Thank you so much.
