---
num: 4
title: "4. Supporting a Dancer’s Mental Health with Psychotherapist, Terry Hyde"
date: "2020-03-30"
duration: "1h 19m"
description: "Dancers train constantly to attain peak performance, working long hours to achieve physical and artistic perfection. Unfortunately, mental health is often sacrificed for that perfection. \nTerry Hyde, former dancer with the Royal Ballet and psychotherapist with patients all over the world, joins Linda and Jennifer to explore this often-neglected aspect of dancer health, and discusses how hypermobility can bring unique mental health problems of its own. Terry discusses the high incidence of anxiety, depression, and OCD (obsessive compulsive disorder) in hypermobile dancers and explores how a dancer’s perfectionism can be both a blessing and a curse. He describes the intrinsic link between the mind and the body, and how anxiety can be reframed into excitement. \nTerry reveals why it’s important to practice talking to your body, and discusses how friends and loved ones can support a dancer needing emotional help - as well as what not to do. \nLearn more about Terry Hyde: https://www.counsellingfordancers.com/about/ https://www.instagram.com/counsellingfordancers/ https://www.facebook.com/counsellingfordancers https://www.linkedin.com/in/terry-hyde-ma-mbacp-b68617176/ https://twitter.com/counselingdance \nLearn more about Dr. Linda Bluestein, the Hypermobility MD, at our websites and be sure to follow us on social media: Websites: https://www.hypermobilitymd.com and www.BendyBodiesPodcast.comInstagram: @hypermobilitymd Twitter: @hypermobilityMD Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hypermobilityMD/ Pinterest: https://www.pinterest.com/hypermobilityMD/ LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/hypermobilitymd/ \nAnd follow guest co-host Jennifer Milner at the links below: Website: www.jennifer-milner.com Instagram: @jennifer.milner Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/jennifermilnerbodiesinmotion/"
tags:
  - "Mental Health"
  - "Hypermobility"
audioUrl: "https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH9253405950.mp3?updated=1721669966"
videoUrl: "https://youtu.be/ZEzsYNPVssA"
snippets: []
guests:
  - "Terry Hyde"
guestImages: []
---
Dr. Linda Bluestein: Hello and welcome to Bendy Bodies. I am so thrilled to be here today with Jennifer Milner, my guest co-host, and Terry Hyde. Terry is a counselor and he is a former professional ballet dancer with the Royal Ballet. Terry, we are thrilled to have you on today.

Terry Hyde: Thank you for inviting me.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And Jen, it's great to have you on as well. Thank you. Okay, wonderful. Well, Terry—

Terry Hyde: Linda, hello, Jen.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Hello. I know, right?

Terry Hyde: Yes, absolutely, absolutely.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, Terry, it is fabulous to have you on today and to hear about your counseling that you're doing with dancers and your work in the space of mental health for dancers. And you started out as a ballet dancer, is my understanding. And can you tell us a bit about what got you into dance and your career as a ballet dancer?

Terry Hyde: Yes, I was a lively child, and what got me into dancing was the fact that my mother didn't want to keep buying new furniture that I jumped on because I was so lively. And she sent me to ballet class when I was 6 years old. And then the local school that I was in put me in for a scholarship for the RAD, and I did that for 5 years, got the scholarship for 5 years, after which, at age 15, I then joined the Royal Ballet School, the senior school in London. Um, and I was there for 2 and a half years. And in the January of the final year, the artistic director of the Royal Ballet phoned up the school and said they wanted me to join the company to play the Russian Sun in Boutique Fantasque, which was just being represented by Leonid Massine, the choreographer of it. So I got in under a temporary contract just for that tour of it, and then they took me on permanently after that, and I was there for about 2 and a half years.

The two companies of the Royal Ballet were joining together, and I left before that happened and joined London's Festival Ballet as a soloist. Now London's Festival Ballet is now called English National Ballet, and we've just had the 70 years anniversary of it last week. Yeah, and so I was doing principal roles, it was mostly character roles, you know, Sancho Panza in Don Quixote and the headmistress in Graduation Ball, Dr. Coppelius in Coppélia, you know, those sort of character roles. I wanted to do more after that, so I left Festival Ballet and went into musical theatre. The first show that I did was a UK tour of West Side Story, a brilliant, absolutely brilliant show. Nothing could have beaten it. And then I did West End musicals, film, and television. I retired 10 years later and set up a business management organization for looking after people in show business.

And it didn't matter, singers, dancers, actors, lighting designers, theater designers, even the dentist of one of the dancers. I managed their affairs as well. Um, so I set that up and ran it for 15 years. And when I retired, I thought I need to know a bit more about what was going on. And I'll tell you now, it was to do with the clients offloading all their issues. So, you know, I go around to talk business and what do they want, etc., etc., etc. And then they would start offloading. And I thought, what do I do with this? What do I do with all this information and all this emotion, you know? And, um, so that's when I started to be and trained to be a psychotherapist. And then in 2010, I did a master's degree in psychotherapy and human practice.

And it wasn't until 2016 when an ex-dancer came to me after they had been discharged from a psychiatric unit. Um, so I treated that person for 6 months and then discharged her. And I thought afterwards, from a marketing mind point of view, this is a niche market. I've been there, done that, gone through all of that stuff, and now I'm a psychotherapist. I thought, wow, yes, let's put it together. So the beginning of 2017, I set up a website called counsellingfordancers.com. And oh yes, a point I need to make for the American listeners is that counselling has two L's in the UK, so if you're doing a search, put two L's in.

From that point on, I've been— so from 2017, I've been pushing hard, banging on doors, emailing people, and I think because of the stigma of mental health, they don't want to know. The artistic directors or principals of schools just don't seem to want to know because there has to be this wonderful glowing sheen in front that the public must see and mustn't talk about mental health. They can talk about injuries and things like that, which of course is what we're going to be talking a bit about now, but mental health, no, it's a no-no. So it's taken 2 years, and if you look on my website, you can see the list of schools and organizations that I've actually got through to that are open-minded and are willing to support their dancers, whether they're students or whether they're professional dancers. So I hope I've covered that question for you.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, absolutely. It's always fascinating to hear how people take their unique set of circumstances and turn it into something that benefits, uh, like you said, a niche market, but a critically important group of people that desperately need help from people like you. So it's wonderful that you're doing what you're doing. As a counselor who specializes in dancers, you've probably seen dancers of all different body types and shapes. Has there been anything in your sessions that has made you draw a connection between hypermobility and specific mental health issues in dancers?

Terry Hyde: Yes, it's called control, or from their point of view, lack of. And so when there is no control— and this is general public as well as us— when there is a lack of control, anxiety sets in because it's part of the fight and flight mechanism that comes in, or fight and flight and freeze, in fact. So when you look at hypermobile dancers, they have a lack of control. You know, could you imagine an ordinary person trying to walk on a tightrope that's swinging around, or on a moving floor? There's a lack of control, and anxiety sets in. And this is what happens with dancers who have extreme hypermobility.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's interesting. I have seen that link myself between anxiety and dancers with hypermobility, but I've never drawn such a direct line between it from a lack of control perspective. A lack of physical control leads to that feeling of lack of control over other parts of your life as well too. That's really interesting.

Terry Hyde: It is. There is a real knock-on effect. It's like, um, uh, yes, on a boat you know, moving around on a boat. There's a lack of control. You can't do anything. So you're either going to go with it or you're going to be really anxious about the moving boat.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure. Yeah, that is very interesting. I've never heard it described in that way either, but that does make a lot of sense because, right, whether people are dancers or not, people with hypermobility definitely are increased risk of anxiety and you're explaining this in such a logical way, and control is such a huge factor even in non-hypermobile, non-dance people that I think we all feel better when we feel more of a sense of control as compared to when we don't. So that's very interesting. How do you use that piece of information in your work with dancers?

Terry Hyde: Well, there's, you know, you can't change the hypermobility because they've got it. You know, and as long as teachers, dance teachers, are able to use those in a positive way and try and help strengthen the hypermobility parts of the body, then the dancer would have more control and the anxiety then reduces. But it's reframing the way those dancers see things. So having more of an understanding of their body, they can reframe the thoughts.

Because when I'm doing my workshops— and I run them both for dance companies and for dance schools— mental health self-care workshops. These are specific for dancers. There are others for actors as well, but the specific ones for dancers— and I try, I break them up into groups and I get them to write down in the groups what are the physical feelings that they get for anxiety. So there's a whole long list of stuff that comes out, and then without actually telling them why I'm doing it, I then get them to do a list of what excites them, you know. So when something excites them, what are they feeling? And invariably the two lists come out the same because that's what it is. They're identical.

But what is it? What is it that creates the difference between anxiety and excitement. It's a thought. The thought is usually, "What if?" And you can say anything after "what if?" and then you can go into fantasy land of what-ifs. And the fantasy land of what-ifs is the extreme anxiety of, "What if I step out of my front door and a slate falls off the roof?" You know, you can go into extremes. So you can— I get them to list their what-ifs, and then I say, well, where are all these what-ifs? Are they in the past or the present or the future? And obviously they're in the future. And I say, can you control the future? I mean, you can to a certain extent. I know I'm generalizing here. You can control the future to a certain extent by setting things in place, but you can go to an extreme. You can go to an obsessive extreme, you know, the obsessive-compulsive disorder. That is an extreme form of anxiety.

Um, you can, you know, encapsulating the whole thing because someone needs to do something regularly because they're out of control. And so something in their past has happened, some trauma or a perceived trauma has happened, something in their life, and that took them out of control. And then they started controlling. Now, I knew we're going— we can go off onto anorexia now. So if there's some trauma that's happening, what's the only thing you can control? What goes in your mouth, right? So that's where a restrictive eating comes in. You can over-exercise, you can control that, can't you? So you go into exercise and you over-exercise and you then burn out. So all of these things come back to the ability or the inability to control your environment.

So if you were brought up in an environment where other siblings or parents or whoever were disruptive and you were the only quiet ones, you had no control over what's going on. Or you have abusive parents, no control over that. So this is where all these environmental situations come in, where anxiety, OCD, anorexia, etc. Plus, of course, when you go to the extremes, you then get depression. Because it becomes too much.

Oh, by the way, as you're coming from America, I was over with the Joffrey Ballet School in November of last year. I spent 2 days with them doing these workshops with each year group. And so this was part of it. It was getting them to talk about their physical feelings when they have anxiety. So whether it's audition anxiety, exam anxiety, performance anxiety, these things create a physical feeling because there's an intrinsic link between the mind and the body. And so then I then ask them, okay, if a ballet company comes to New York and you want to go and see them and you're excited about it, what are your physical feelings? So they then listed those physical feelings, and bingo, they're both the same. So anxiety's physical symptoms and excitement's physical symptoms are the same. The only difference is that creates it is a thought. So the thought of the negative thought or the positive thought, and as I mentioned earlier, the what-ifs. So what if I fell over on stage? What if my shoe fell off? What if I forgot? And then, oh look, there's this— my parents are out front. What if I go wrong? You know, so all of these things create— and because there's an intrinsic link between the mind and the body, invariably you do go wrong because you've told yourself you go wrong. And so the thing is to reframe it and change it into, I'm excited about this, I'm excited to go on stage, I'm excited that my parents are out front, I'm going to be really good. And then you go on and do it. And that is the difference. It's that thought and the negative thought.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's a beautiful way to help give them the power to reframe it and take control of that feeling of not having control.

Terry Hyde: That's right, yes. Yeah, and as I mentioned, that control has got to do with so much, so many other disorders, or the lack of control has got to do with the other disorders. Absolutely. So there we are.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wow, that is really interesting. I don't know about you, Jen, but I've never heard things explained in quite that way before. And to me, the more that we understand these things, the better we can deal with them ourselves and the better we can help other people that are struggling with these situations. So absolutely, absolutely. And I see so much in the dancers that I work with and through my own career. There is so little that you can control as a dancer. You have no control over casting, you have no control over who's going to hire you or who's going to want to hire you. And you can always turn those things and say, well, I choose to accept this contract and I choose to go to this place and I choose to do this. But still, as a dancer, you feel like there's not a lot that you do have control over. You don't have control over whether or not your favorite maker of pointe shoe is going to retire and suddenly you have to find a new type of pointe shoe. There's so much as a dancer that you don't feel like you have control over, and it's so easy for dancers to devolve into, well, what can I control? And as you said, those go into some self-harm areas for sure.

Terry Hyde: Yes, they go to dark areas as to what they control. But you know, the other thing I talk about in the workshops is the fact that when situations arise, they're meant to happen. They're meant to happen for a reason. And so if you have that philosophy, it makes life easier. And to work with your gut feeling— I was talking about the intrinsic link between the mind and the body, you know, the— from an early age, we're told one thing, and we'll go back to the anxiety now. We're told one thing. So maybe a teacher or a parent said, aren't you nervous about going on stage? So that feeling that a child has got has been told that they're nervous, so they're already linked into that nervous thing rather than saying, "I bet you're excited about going on stage," so then they can link, "Ah, that feeling is talking about excitement." So it's telling students one thing that creates all this negativity rather than being positive right from the beginning. Sorry, I went off track there.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh no, that's absolutely fantastic. This is going to be very useful information because, you know, right, whether you're auditioning for something and they're looking for somebody who's a different height than you, you can't control that.

Terry Hyde: So correct, that's right. Yeah, and of course they— it's really subjective in an audition, and if the person who is auditioning understands how subjective it is that that director or that choreographer will only want a certain type of person. Yes, you've got everyone else there, but they're only looking for a certain type of person, and therefore if you don't fit, that's okay. It's not right for you, you know. Go on and do another audition somewhere else. And the same thing about— I hear so often, I want to go into the Royal Ballet, I want to get into ABT. And you think, is that company really right for you? Are you going to enjoy it? So if they do get in, all well and good. If they force and force and force and force and they finally get in, is that going to be— are they going to be happy there? Is that the right company for them? So allowing— what I was saying earlier about the gut feeling about, um, so I had one client who had this idea of getting where she wanted to get to, and I obviously can't mention companies otherwise it'll come back to her. Um, and I put all that through her and she finally went with her gut feeling and she's really happy, not in the company that she wanted to do. And I said, it may be that you get into that company and then in that company and then you get to the company after that that you actually wanted, but on the other hand, you may not, right? The less pressure you have on yourself the easier it is for you.

And so we did, before her audition, we did these— I think in America you call it imagery, I call it visualisations. We do these visualisations on the process going to the audition and doing the audition, and this worked in her school as well. When she was at school, we were doing that, and she used these visualisations before, and she felt so relaxed. And of course, when you're relaxed, you do things better.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely, yes. And I think it's so important what you said about the things that come up, come up for a reason and can be useful. And I see over and over again with the dancers, especially with injuries, something will happen and they will just be devastated and they'll say, well, now I can't do this. And they see such short-term, like the next 3 months of my life are ruined. And I always tell them, this injury, it's not a speed bump, you know, that's going to make you slow down. I said you can use it as a launching ramp, you know, that ramp that bikes ride to jump up and go higher in the air. And I said you can look at it as something that's going to slow you down and hold you back, or you can look at it as an opportunity to get stronger and healthier and better. And when you come back from the injury, you're going to be better than you were before you got injured.

Terry Hyde: And it's a great analogy.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: It's so important for them to see that. And especially with my hypermobile clients, they get so frustrated and they say, I cannot handle this body, I can't deal with it. It's not fair that all my friends can do this. And I'm still trying to be able to hold it all together. And I'm like, but you put the work in now. And it's going to be so much better down the road. And then having this trial will make them a better dancer than if it had just come naturally to them. And it was all everything just fell in place and they didn't have to work for it.

Terry Hyde: And if they can accept that they needed the break.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes.

Terry Hyde: As you know, that what was their body telling them, right? Because I do, I do visualizations with injuries as well, um, and I get them to talk to— I feed them the questions and they talk to their bodies. And these demonstrations that are done in the workshops sometimes bring out emotions because the answers some of the students get and some of the dancers get, professional dancers, are quite emotional because their body's been trying to tell them something for some time. So one person that came out said, I can't speak. So I then bend down and they whispered, and the answer was, I need to rest. So you're getting these answers all the time from your body, or your body's screaming out sometimes trying to tell you things. and they just— the body then just gives out, and then you have an injury due to that.

And the stress that the body is taking also creates stress in the mind, and then that's when anxiety, tiredness, burnout, and all of these sort of things happen. And of course, when you are tired, there is a possibility— rather than a possibility— that you are going to be injured because you're not controlling your body in a way that is safe. And so these are just knock-on effects, you know. Does mental illness create an injury? And then when you are injured, do you then get to have anxiety or a mental illness? And I don't mean a mental illness as in a disorder. I mean you not being yourself and feeling under the weather, and so the emotions and everything like that. Because you don't need a mental illness, you don't need to have a mental illness to come and see me. Right, you get to a crossroads in life. So I've had dancers come to me and say, I don't know what to do, I don't, you know, I'm deciding, do I leave dance, do I do something else? And so, you know, these crossroads in their careers, uh, they come to me for help for that. And also the grieving process of leaving, leaving a career, leaving an identity.

If you consider— I know we're going off subject here, I'm sorry— but if you consider they have trained since some of them from 2 years old and they are mid-20s into 30s, so that is a long time to have an identity, and then you're going to lose that identity, or are you? What are you going to do after that? That creates anxiety. And when you look at extra hypermobile dancers, that's a thing that they're worried about as well, you know. Should, should they give up? Do they need to persevere with this? So those are the things that are talked about in therapy sessions. There we are. I brought it back to hypermobility again.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, no, and Terry, I am so happy that you brought up about grieving because that was, you know, not something that I anticipated that we would touch on specifically, but that's critically important. I have gone through that personally, both—

Terry Hyde: Likewise.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, right, when I realized that I was not going to be able to be a professional dancer when I was a teenager and my own injuries led me onto a different path. And then again, when as an anesthesiologist, I developed some medical problems that then made me have to switch from being working in the operating room to doing something different, which I now do pain management. But both of those times and then several places along the way and with my patients and other people that I know, you're absolutely right about the grieving of the identity. And that's really, really hard. Do you have suggestions for how to cope with that? Because that, I think, is— you hit on just a huge part of what's challenging for people.

Terry Hyde: Well, we go through transitions throughout our life, and especially for dancers, because if you think local school into vocational school, so you're leaving behind all these things, and if you have to move, then you're leaving friends as well. And you're leaving home if you're going to a boarding school, you know, for a vocational school, or you're living around the school. And then you're going from being a child, even though you are sort of 17, 18, 19, going into a company to become an adult, although you're still a child there. So there's all these transitions which are small or big grieving, and so you have to deal with the process. And if you can work through each of those, plus you've got the normal grieving, which is friends and family passing away, or pets, or moving home. And all of these processes give rise to grieving. And so each process needs to be got through. So it's an acceptance that— if you look up the stages of grief, so this is a search online, stages of grief, the final stage is acceptance. So you accept where you are and who you are at that point in time and accept what you have learned. This is me saying it, not the stages of grief online. This is me saying it. Accept what you have learned from the process, the stage just before that. Take that with you, um, whether it's positive or negative. Understand what the negativity is and leave that behind. Bring with you the positive thing, what you've learned, and bring with you what happened about the negativity so it doesn't happen again.

And so these processes go through, and I think the main thing is identity. It's like, um, some dancers that have got, uh, real, you know, injuries, and they retire and they have these injuries all the time, they just talk about the injuries all the time, or they've had a new knee or they've had a new hip, and all they're talking about are these injuries. So the injuries become their identity rather than talking about dancers. So if they become well, what are they going to do? They don't have any— they don't have an identity. Nobody's going to run and help them. No one's going to talk to them. You know, all of these things are sort of all wrapped up into identity. So that's so important. Who are you? Or who am I? Whichever way you want to say it.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, absolutely. I went through that myself when I had an injury that stopped my dancing career and ended up going in for counseling and using, um, Career Transition for Dancers, which is a great organization in the United States that helps dancers who have had a professional career transition. Um, but if I hadn't found that, I don't know where I would have gone and who I would have figured out to talk to. So having people out there that just say, hey, this is a thing, and it's okay to need help getting through this thing. You know, just because you're 27 and you have your whole life ahead of you and you can do so many more careers, just move on—

Terry Hyde: it—

Dr. Linda Bluestein: that's not that easy. So helping people do that, understand and acknowledge that it's something that needs attention and that it's okay to give it that attention. That's so important.

Terry Hyde: Yes, yes.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Do you have suggestions for dancers in terms of how they can work on the mental health aspects so that their physical pain doesn't overwhelm them?

Terry Hyde: Yes, there are visualizations that I use to help with pain management. Jen, I don't know what you do with regard to pain management?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Like, personally? I talk to smart people like you and work on a vitamin regimen, but then pain management for me is about finding that balance between healthy movement. You know, I have to keep moving and not doing too much movement. I think the biggest issue for dancers, especially hypermobile ones, when they retire, whether they retire by choice or forced to by injury, you can't just stop. And when you do stop, your body has been kind of held together for so many years. And when you stop as a hypermobile person, it doesn't know what to do. So for me, I have to continue with my exercise, with my working out, with my being accountable to other people. And then stay on top of it with really clean, healthy eating and vitamins. And then a fair amount of people that I can talk to so that I can unload on people, the people that I can, that I confide in. I can unload on them and they can build me back up a little bit when it gets too bad. What do you usually suggest?

Terry Hyde: Um, well, I, although I do this in the workshops that I present. The one-to-one sessions are obviously easier because it's more personal, but it's the talking to the body. And I do the demonstration in the workshop just as a proof of how powerful the mind is. So this is talking about anxiety and, you know, reframing, etc., and how the voices in our head— and I don't mean the psychotic voices, the voices, the accumulated voices from parents and teachers, etc., that correct us all the time. And I'll get back to that in a moment. We're able to reduce the pain, whether it's for a short period or a longer period. So I teach the technique of talking to the injury. You know, first of all is, why do you get the injury? And making the injury the injured area into sort of symbolic shape or a character or something like that, and changing what it is. And it's quite powerful to be able to do that. And you know these television programs that say, children, don't do this at home? Well, I tell them, yes, do this at home, do this after class, you know, do the visualization. And the visualization also relaxes them as well. And I teach them meditation and mindfulness. So these are all part of what I do.

So I'm going to get back to the pain, and I get them to score their pain at the beginning. And that's how I pick people out. So I want someone with a bit out of 0 to 10, you know, quite high. To enable me to reduce it to an extent that, oh wow, that's great. But I do preface what I'm doing and I'm saying it doesn't mean your injury has healed, it means that your pain is reduced. So don't go off and dance if you have a bad injury, but I've reduced the pain. So it just allows the body also, if it's not trying to protect you from the pain to actually get on with healing the body.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: There, that makes sense. This is fantastic, these types of tools that you're giving people, because they can use them throughout their whole lives.

Terry Hyde: Correct. Yes, that's right.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely. Well, I like the idea of looking inside yourself and looking at the injury and acknowledging it, giving it a symbolic shape or something like that so that people can reconcile with that. And I think that leads to, if you could elaborate a bit more on how you sort of learn to love and accept your injury and your body. And you spoke a little bit earlier about how our identities can be tied up as dancers and who we are and what we can control. How do you help dancers with that? How do you help them accept their body with their love, their hypermobility, love the body shape whether it's the one that they wish they had or not, and to, if not embrace, at least accept and acknowledge and love those flaws. So how do you help them with that?

Terry Hyde: It takes a bit of time, and I don't mean like time in one session. I mean it takes quite a few sessions because you have to break the initial thoughts, the thought patterns that they've had right from early on, what they've been told and their own subjective view of themselves. So all of that has to be broken down and broken away and then rebuilt as to who they want to be, who they feel they are. And once they do that, then they can start loving themselves. And that's such an important thing to be able to say, I love myself, because as a dancer, and especially ballet, it's very black and white thinking right from early childhood, with a teacher correcting you every day. You know, you're wrong, you're wrong, you're wrong, you're wrong. And the self-esteem gets knocked on the head completely. Continually. And so we then create, as answers throughout our childhood, a very black and white thinking. There is no gray, there's no pragmatism. You're either right or you're wrong. So it's then turned in on ourselves, you know, I'm no good. Yeah. And it's just a continual battering of— it's not verbal abuse. But it's verbal negativity, you know, and a lot of teachers don't have time to support all of the students.

So I was in a workshop, I presented a workshop recently, and it came out that they were talking about corrections, and I said, how do you take corrections? They said, oh, very well. I said, did you write them in notebooks? 'Yes, we write them in notebooks at the end of the class or at the end of the day.' Um, and then I turned it around. I said, 'What do you feel like when you don't get corrected?' And there was sort of silence in the room, in the studio. And one person said, 'I felt awful.' And then, you know, others were sort of starting to talk about that, about not— about feeling bad. And so none of them would say, 'Oh, that was great, I wasn't corrected,' you know, feeling good about the fact of not being corrected. But it wasn't. It was so negative, right? And so all of that has to be taken away before— I'm getting back to your original question— all of that has to be taken away and rebuilt into, 'I am okay,' right? It's okay to be sad. It's okay to be happy. It's okay not to be corrected. So the whole thing has to be built up again.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, and Terry, this is where it shows just how valuable it is to have someone like you in this position, because most counselors would not stop to think to ask that question. Um, but that is absolutely true. And I spent my whole life growing up thinking if you don't get corrected, it's because the teacher doesn't think you're worth spending the time correcting because they only yell at the ones that they like, right? And that's the sort of feeling you grow up with. And there's this sense that dancers are naturally people pleasers and perfectionists. And I wonder how much of it is, are we constantly trying to please other people because we haven't figured out how to love ourselves and where that balance is of would we be striving so much for external validation if we had that internal sort of moral center certainty that this is who I am and this is good?

Terry Hyde: You know, you've hit the nail on the head. I don't need to answer that.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So when you see a dancer who is striving with that, with that people-pleasing and that perfectionist tendency, do you try to help them find that healthy balance by working on their self-appreciation, or do you try to help them find a work-life balance? How do you approach that?

Terry Hyde: It's across the board. And the thing is, Jen, that when people come and see me, they don't come to me for that. They come to me for something else that could be— I won't say trivial, but it could be the top of the iceberg. So they're coming to me with the top of the iceberg, and then we work downwards. And those sort of things then come out after half a dozen sessions or something like that. And I don't want to get too heavy about this, but I think after 10— it was about 10 sessions— this young lady came to see me, and it was 10 sessions that she said she was— she's been abused. And so that was then, that was the nugget. You know, the analogy of peeling back the onion skin.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely.

Terry Hyde: That was it. That was the nugget of the whole thing. So this was 8 years old, and I think she was 17 when she came to see me. Yeah. So all of this had come from that— the low self-esteem, not good enough, etc.— which was reinforced then by the teachers either at the academy or the ballet school, parents ignoring her, all of these sort of things. So it's just a whole compilation of different aspects, and you can't say, 'I'm going to come for one thing,' and get— so that's what happens. Some people don't want to dig there because, right, they don't, they don't want— they either consciously, they know it's happened and they don't want to talk about it, or unconsciously, they're feared there is something there, and I don't want to get emotional about it. But the only way you're going to get emotional about it is actually to work through it and get angry and get upset and get frustrated.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, because that's the only way to be healed, to get through it. That's so— yeah, that's beautiful. I see the same thing physically when dancers come to me and say, you know, I have these— this hip issue, and I'm trying to work on this hip issue. And I say, that's great. We're going to work on your back because I can see it's coming from their back. And they're like, I don't want to work on my back. I don't like working on my back. Well, we're going to work on your back.

Terry Hyde: Why don't— yeah, why don't you like working on your back?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Because it's hard and I, it's— I can't do it and it doesn't feel good. You know, the exact same thing as you, but with much lower stakes. Obviously the stakes with you are much higher. Um, and I think that so much of what the dancers have to deal with, it's finding that center, that moral center that we talked about and loving yourself, but getting constantly barraged from the teachers, from the parents, from the schools, from the companies. And now, just within the past few years, from social media, which I cannot tell you how glad I am my career was before social media. I don't know that I would have survived with social media. But I'm sure that social media and its influence has to come up with your dancers and the sessions. What sort of problems do you see that dancers knowingly or unknowingly might bring in with them? And what kind of advice would you give dancers about how to utilize social media in the healthiest possible way?

Terry Hyde: Well, the last question, don't go on it. The build-up to your question is comparing.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, right, right.

Terry Hyde: So they're comparing, and therefore if they see other people that are allegedly better than them in that fraction of a second that is on there, or their short little video clips that they've taken after class where they've done 12 pirouettes on pointe— I mean, I bet you they couldn't do that again— so they can be, oh my God, 'Look, they've done that. I can't do that.' And then their self-esteem just sort of drops. And this awful thing, you know, we're talking about hypermobility, this awful thing of overstretching. You know, when someone takes their leg right over and touches the other ear.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, I know, right?

Terry Hyde: It's overstretching, like that awful crotch shot that is shown. I think, do they dance like that?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

Terry Hyde: And of course they don't.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Or if they do, not for very long.

Terry Hyde: Not for very long, no. Yeah, that's what I was saying.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: How many people have injured themselves trying to do that because they've seen somebody else do it? Yes. And they think, I want to do that, and they don't, you know, realize— I think dancers are also drawn to dance. I want to definitely continue on the social media topic, but I also wonder how many people are drawn to dance because there's some part of them that likes that constant critique and those comparisons and the, the, um, the hypervigilance about these little— you know, I mean, you think about ballet, it's all about the minor details, right? So people who are hypermobile tend to be hypervigilant about a lot of things, which of course just increases their anxiety and can make things like deconditioning, once it starts to happen, it can make it worse. So I think Terry's point about social media and just completely staying off is an interesting one, because once you're on, it can be very hard to modulate that.

Terry Hyde: Yes, because it's the— both of you were talking in different terms about being liked, and that's the word, isn't it, on social media? Like, so they're craving for the likes. And so when the likes don't come, or not enough likes come, they then become depressed because, and upset, why isn't anyone liking? I've only got 50 and I got 200 the other day. Why didn't they like my photo? What was wrong with it? And so all of this sort of imaginary build-up, you know, the what-ifs that I mentioned before, this is all the same model, looking at something that's unrealistic.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely, yes, I totally agree. It's finding the balance because social media is here and you can't ignore it. I know dancers, when they audition for a company, I know the companies look at their social media so that social media has become their new resume, basically. And I tell my dancers when they go audition for colleges or summer intensives, if they're younger, I had a dancer whose friend auditioned for a college summer program. She got a full scholarship. 2 days later, she posted on her social media, "Cutting class because it's too nice outside," and the college called her the next day and revoked her scholarship. And they said, "We don't want someone that is going to be cutting class." So I caution my dancers, social media should be your resume. It's your business card. And it's what you use to establish whatever sort of dancer you're going to be to the world. But it's not something to go to to get affirmation and to get that feedback.

Terry Hyde: Quite.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Because it is fake. It is fake for sure.

Terry Hyde: Yeah. So one day a week would be a good start. Because obviously they're going to get withdrawal symptoms. Because it's an addiction. And with all addictions, you're going to get withdrawal symptoms. So, yeah, start off with 1 day a week.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wow, so literally, yeah, that is great. And I just want to make sure, for myself as well as for everyone else, what you're suggesting is that literally 6 days a week is social media free, and 1 day per week that you go on and do whatever it is that you need or want to do, but that the other 6 days you don't look. And I agree with you. I, but I know myself, self-control is going to be as challenging. I think it's fantastic. Those are fantastic suggestions.

Terry Hyde: I think that's what makes sense. The thing is, you see, I'm saying, do as I say, not as I do.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

Terry Hyde: Right. My social media is business, right? So my 3 social media sites are Instagram, Facebook, and Twitter, and they are for business. So I'll give you the tags now, which is @counsellingfordancers with 2 L's. With 2 L's, yep. Thank you, Jen. Is Instagram and Facebook, and because there wasn't enough letters to do the Twitter one, because you've only got a certain number of letters you can use, it's @counsellingdance, and this time it has one L.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Just to keep us on our metaphorical toes.

Terry Hyde: Yes, that's right. Yes, so yeah, you got the point, Jen, didn't you?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, this is a pun one. Yes, and we will have links to all of your sites, your website, all of your social media sites on the Bendy Bodies, which will be found under the hypermobilitymd.com website. So there will be a page for this podcast which will have those links. So for people that might be thinking, wow, how am I going to remember all that? I'm driving in my car, whatever. We will make it as easy as possible for you to find Terry. And I'm glad that you brought that up, Terry, because Jen and myself and you, we all use social media for our business. So what advice do you give to business owners like us who are also, you know, still trying to navigate relationships and, you know, other things and so still can run into problems with social media for sure?

Terry Hyde: Are you talking about business or non-business?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I guess I'm talking about kind of, you know, balancing social media use when you're— when you are using it for business. You explain what if you're not using it for business, to use it one day a week and the other 6 days to stop, if I understand correctly. If you're using it for business, do you have any suggestions? Because we're going to have a wide variety of listeners on this program, some of whom are, you know, studio owners, for example, and they may also be using social media for their studio, for your, you know, ballet studio or their contemporary dance studio or something.

Terry Hyde: Okay, so I'm in two groups of dance teachers. I think on Facebook it's Dance Teachers Hub, and I think Dance Teachers Network, something like that. And I see a lot of postings on there, you know, asking for help and things like that. And I think that is helpful to do posts like that, but there are some on there and I think, why on earth did you post that? It's really making you look bad. So my advice is be mindful of what you're saying, type it on a screen or write it first and then post it if you think it looks, you know, if you think it's okay. But some of the things that are posted on the business thing, it just makes them look like idiots, and they actually haven't thought it through before posting. You know, you know this thing about when you get angry and you want to send off an email to someone, you don't— yes, type it out because then you can get your anger out, but don't send it, right?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

Terry Hyde: Edit it, edit it down, go away for a few hours, come back and redo it and send it without all the anger and something, you know, be firm and that sort of thing. Or just, yes, just be mindful of what you're writing and what you're posting.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes.

Terry Hyde: And also pictures as well. Sure. Especially with studio owners with young girls and boys. Be careful what you post picture-wise.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, absolutely. And I was just going to ask about that, about the common denominator. So you're thinking along the lines of what they might be sharing in the way of photos, or I guess I was going to ask you, what is it that they're doing that makes you think, did you think twice before you actually hit send or return or whatever the case may be?

Terry Hyde: I can't think of any examples but I'm sure your listeners will go, yes, I've seen those.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: The people who go and say, I just have to rant, and then they say a little something and then put the smiley face after it and post it. And you think, that's the kind of thing you should tell your girlfriend over dinner, not necessarily everybody on Facebook.

Terry Hyde: Yes, yes, right, that's right. Or your therapist.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Or yes, or your therapist, exactly.

Terry Hyde: Exactly.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, I think an important thing for all of us to remember is that the way social media is done with how they kind of keep showing you new things, right? So it feels like it's not permanent when, when in actuality anything that you write. So even if you go back later and delete that comment or you delete that post, somebody could have taken a screenshot of it. So anything that you write can actually be in actual permanence. And I know for me, when I was applying to be on the faculty at the Medical College of Wisconsin, they did look at my social media. I mean, they shared with me later that, you know, like you were saying, um, I think it was Jen who was talking about a student who had an offer withdrawn. Um, you know, it happens at all levels that they will look at your social media and see what you've shared. So you get a lot of insight into a person that way. So absolutely. And I think the other piece to social media, at least for me and where I am, is to control who I follow. I'm always telling my dancers, if you are following people who are super bendy or posting super this and super that, it can lead to a lot of envy and a lot of self-comparison that is not helpful. And I try to only follow people that are encouraging to me or that I learn something from or whose posts I enjoy, but I don't feel like I have to compare myself to them all the time. So it's what we put out there, but it's also what we allow ourselves to take in from social media, I think, as well.

Terry Hyde: Good point.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Yes. That's a very good point. And I think the more you like certain things, the more that they will show you of those things. So you're right that what you follow is critically important because they all have algorithms. Right, right. And that will show up. Well, we have talked a lot about some of the issues that dancers struggle with and a lot of the burdens and baggage that we carry as a general population throughout our careers. But what doesn't get talked about as much with dancers are the positive skills that we have that we might have more than the general public. Sometimes dancers are portrayed as having grown up in a bubble or not very world-smart or all sorts of different stereotypes. And there's actually a lot of great life skills that you get out of being a dancer. So what are— what do you see as some of these positive skills and how do you encourage them to sort of take ownership of these skills and be able to use them outside the dance studio?

Terry Hyde: When you give up, when you retire, whether forced or by choice, there are so many transferable skills that we as dancers have learned. Yes, we may have black and white thinking, but that helps us concentrate. You know, I've set up— so I retired, set up a business, and that drive that I had that drove me through a dance career, a performance career, the concentration, the need to improve. So that has carried me through into that business. What I didn't mention over a cross-period, that for 12 years I sat in both criminal and family courts as a magistrate part-time.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wow.

Terry Hyde: And I was also for 4 years on the Lord Chancellor's Advisory Committee, so I sat on that. So all of these different things that I'd learned as a dancer from that early age and performing, uh, were transferable into all of these different aspects of life. And then of course doing a master's degree at something like 50 years old, I think it was, and I wasn't academic at all. I left school with 3 exams: English language, maths, and general science. I was rubbish at school, and then I was doing this master's degree. So it doesn't matter. Nowadays, of course, in a lot of the vocational schools, they want you to do a degree, so they've already sort of started the ending, as it were, started to help you. But yes, there are all these transferable positives that we have. So being in a family group, not as in dancers, so being in a group together. I know there are some individuals who would like to be by themselves, but— and supporting each other. So that all of these positives, you know, that I, um, I went to a school on Monday, went to a pre-professional school on Monday because one of the dancers had died from cancer, and so I was doing a group— it wasn't group therapy, but I was just talking to them about grief. I spent about an hour with them, and when one was talking and they were in tears, all these arms would come out of nowhere and they'd all touch that person. It was so wonderful to see. So there is this camaraderie that is built up when you're dancing, either at school or performing. There's the speed of learning things. So these are all positives. Even if some people say, "Oh, I can't pick this up," and I can't— they do, they do, but they think they don't. There is the positives of actually going out on stage and performing. Wow, you know, 2,000 people, 1,500 people, however many, 400 people, but you go out there and you perform and you do something. It takes a lot. So all of these are positives. Can you think of any others, Jen? Linda?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: For me, I found it— the discipline was very helpful. You know, you have to have a certain amount of self-discipline to reach a certain level, even if just in the ballet school and not even professionally. So I think the discipline crosses over into a lot of different areas. Linda, what about you?

I think for me, in, I know when I was first getting injured and I was in high school, I found myself with these big, huge blocks of time when I wasn't able to dance. And I thought, wow, now what do I do? Because I was used to having to be so efficient, you know, with my schoolwork and, you know, getting my class, rehearsal, whatever. So I think definitely all of the things that both of you have mentioned and time, for me, time management was another one that was very—

Terry Hyde: Oh, yes. Yeah.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Very useful. Absolutely. Well, Terry, you mentioned earlier that one of the benefits of being a dancer is that family group and that sense of closeness. And we absolutely lean on each other, you know, during the hard rehearsals and the long tech weeks and the disappointing casting and all of that stuff. When someone is going through something, when a dancer's going through some sort of challenging mental health issue, what can their families, their dance family or their actual family, and their friends do to support their dancer? What are some suggestions you would give to those who see a dancer struggling with something?

Terry Hyde: Okay, the first thing is don't try and fix it.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Thank you.

Terry Hyde: Just, just be, just be the pair of ears. Just be someone that will listen.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Beautiful.

Terry Hyde: Yes, that's it. That's all they need. They may feel so much better. The majority of the time, people just want to offload. You called it upload? No, download.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: What did you call it?

Terry Hyde: No, I call it offload.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, with a double L. Yeah, and one F, except on Twitter when it's one L.

Terry Hyde: Yeah, that's right. So just, just be there to listen to the people. So I get, I get, um, so I'm still dealing with general public, uh, come to see me for therapy. And the most complaints that come in from women— and it's usually women— say that either he won't listen to me or he wants to fix it. And this is a male thing, you see. But in the dance world, everyone wants to fix things because we are fixers. Yes, we want to get things right.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: We want to get it right. Exactly.

Terry Hyde: That's right. So it's our mindset. So we want to help people, we want to fix it for them. And this is what you should do, and that's what you should do. And if I was in your place, then no, no, no, don't do any of that. Just say, what would be helpful for you for me to do?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I love that. That is beautiful. So what would they, what sort of warning signs would they need to look for, family and friends and dancers themselves, about the possibility of self-harm, about going into an eating disorder or depression/suicidal thoughts? What sort of warning signs do we need to look for in dancers, whether in ourselves or in friends who surround us, to the point where we need to encourage them to get help?

Terry Hyde: Okay, I think from the point of view of selves, it creeps up. It creeps up on the individual, and if they do start self-harming, that's the realization. You know, if they do start cutting themselves or scratching or picking sores or things like that, or start pulling their eyebrows out or eyelashes. There's a realization there that something is wrong, and they need to feel brave and open enough to say to someone, I need help, you know, to ask. So Monday, as the example for this, for this group, I said for their year group, don't just say, hi, how are you? Because that's the vernacular nowadays, isn't it? That's when you say, "Hi, how are you?" and that's it, you walk past. If that person looks low, down, sad, doesn't want to talk, actually ask them again, a couple of times, "How are you? Would you like to talk?" And so that's the supportive way.

The other signs are being reclusive, not wanting to join in with things, especially if you're in a group or a year group or a family. Within a family, not wanting to eat, not wanting to talk, sleeping a lot, going up in the bedroom a lot. So not communicating. And those are some of the signs. Being tearful a lot, of course, you know, that's only if you actually see them being tearful, because most of the time they go and cry in their bedroom or their room, right?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

Terry Hyde: There's these little signs, and friends and family that know these people well will see changes, and they will hear changes in what's been said as well. So if there are any changes, those are the signs. Um, being— I'm just trying to think how to word it. Being overly loud, talking too much, because what they're doing, the individual is covering up, masking.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, yes.

Terry Hyde: So as you say, they're masking their feelings by going over the top, and they don't realize they're going over the top because it's not them. And other people will recognize it. So it's recognizing the differences, subtle differences in the individual's behavior.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes. Well, it sounds like over the course of this conversation, what I've heard from you is that dancers have to be able to get to a point where they love themselves and accept themselves and can hold that place within themselves regardless of what other people are saying or doing around them. And it sounds like we are hoping and we desperately need mental health to become a more talked-about issue amongst dancers and that the stigma needs to be taken away so that it can be something that is more open and out there. And I've crossed paths with you several times over the past year or so. We've worked together on some things. And I know you've been working hard since, I think you said 2017, to sort of build this, and there are a few other organizations out there. What are you hoping to see have happen in the next couple of years for mental health and dancers, and where are you hoping that it's going to go? New studies that will come out, bridges that might be built. What are you hoping will happen?

Terry Hyde: Well, what I see in the next 5 years is in the UK, I want to set up continuing professional development, CPD workshops for counselors and psychotherapists that want to work with people in show business, want to work with performers, so they understand what performers are. Because I've had so many clients come to me and said, oh, I have had counseling before, we didn't have an idea what I was talking about. In fact, and one of them said, in fact, they told me to give up because of the anxiety. Oh, this is not the right professionally for you. So they have no idea. So there's that. There's— I'm trying to get some research together, or trying to get a research center together, so it'll be a university or something like that. And if any of your listeners know of one, even if it's in the States, to do research, and it needs a dance company or needs a pre-professional school, vocational school, because it needs quantitative research done on if you have a mental health issue, and it doesn't matter how mild it is, so mild anxiety or depression, something like that, are you more susceptible to injury? So there's that research, and then the other research is that looking at ADHD and neurodiversity, neurodiversity in dancers. Is it more prevalent? So it's still up to a non-diagnosable level, but is it more prevalent in dancers than it is in the general public because of the ballet training, especially ballet training from year dot when you first start? And I was talking about the black and white thinking, and that's all part of these traits of neurodiversity. So those are the two bits of research that I'm looking at, and obviously there's all different other researchers, but you know, it comes from the top. So this next 5 years hopefully comes from the top, the principals of the pre-professional, the vocational schools, and the artistic directors opening their ears and taking their blinkers off to say, yes, there is an issue, and yes, please come and help us. So from my individual point of view, and I only know there's a couple of people other than myself— there's one, I think, on the West Coast, your West Coast, and there's someone in Australia— but I am available to travel the world to do these workshops for the schools and for the dance companies. And until when I do these workshops, they go, wow, yeah, I wish you'd have come before. We needed you. They're so blinkered that they just don't listen, right? And they don't want to know. Yes, because everything has to be glamorous. There has to be the glitter, the lights, the costumes, and everything. It's got to be all wonderful. They don't want any issues about mental health, right?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: How will this look on Instagram? Well, we're masters of illusion, right? I mean, we're taught—

Terry Hyde: we are smoke and mirrors. Yeah, yeah.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: This is what I explained on Saturday too, that, you know, with pain, pain in dancers, which is, you know, pain, hypermobility disorders, those are my two biggest areas that I'm passionate about. And this ties into both, of course. And that we're taught from an early age that, you know, yes, we need to try to be as perfect as— especially in ballet— as perfect as possible, because there is a right and a wrong way to do everything. And that we're supposed to make it look as effortless as possible. So then if we really becomes a problem, how do we get that self-care that we need? How do we tap into resources? How do we work together? So I love what you're doing, Terry and Jen. I mean, it's really, really fantastic to get this information. Absolutely.

Terry Hyde: Thank you. Thank you.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, I have so much to chew over from this interview. I really appreciate it. And I can't wait for my dancers to hear it and to get encouraged from what they hear in this. Is there anything that you want to add, anything that you want to say that hasn't been said to those dancers, especially the hypermobile ones that struggle with the issues we've talked about today? Is there anything you wanted to add?

Terry Hyde: No, just to reiterate, love yourself, be good to yourself, look after yourself. Absolutely. And if you've got a day off, have a day off.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Thank you. I hope all my days are like that.

Terry Hyde: Have a day off, away from everything. Get out of the ballet bubble. Talk to people that have got nothing to do with ballet. Have— make friends with people that have nothing to do with ballet. Get an outside look on life. I left the ballet bubble when I left Festival Ballet. Into musical theatre. Wow, what a difference! Great. But it would be nice to be in ballet and still have the difference, but it's no. So it was the bubble, blinkered, terrible.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And people can find you at counsellingfordancers.com, which is two L's. They can find you @counsellingfordancers on Instagram and Facebook, with two L's. And on Twitter, @counsellingdance with one L.

Terry Hyde: Did I get that correct? No, counsellingdance with one L. Okay, for Twitter. Counsellingdance with one L. Okay, very good.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And we will also have all of these links on the HypermobilityMD website under the Bendy Bodies podcast link.

Terry Hyde: And they can email me from the website. There's an email address, or just click on email and up comes your email account. So for you to ask me questions and things.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Excellent. And I know that people with your expertise are few and far between, and I also know that you do long-distance counseling. So if anybody does not live in the UK, don't let that discourage you from reaching out to Terry and talking to him. And he can work with you wherever you are.

Terry Hyde: Correct, yes. And treat it like you're going to a physical therapist.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes.

Terry Hyde: You know, to just— if you've got even one little thing that's wrong, you've got an audition coming up or something like that, or just one little thing, only one or two sessions, and it could clear you. Obviously some of them are a lot more difficult than that, but just treat it like I'm just going to go to the physical therapist.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And having somebody with your expertise and your objectivity makes such a huge difference because as much as we talked about family support and things like that, and that's critically important, those people are— their perspective is going to be different because they're already present in your life, whereas you can— not only do you have the skill set and the experience, from multiple different angles. You've had such an interesting career with so many exposures that really, you know, give you such a unique perspective on all of this.

Terry Hyde: So there is another thing about the therapy is that a lot of schools and dance companies do have in-house therapists, counselors, but either the students or the dancers themselves don't want to go through the company because then the company knows, even though supposedly what's said in the counselling room is confidential. And I've heard otherwise from this, from another, from a school. Coming to me, there's no contact with the school or the dance company, so it really is confidential.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right. And in the US, I know, and I would imagine it's true other places, there— the rules surrounding confidentiality in mental health are much more strict than they are for your medical records otherwise. However, that being said, I can completely understand the reluctance on the part of the student because you just don't— if you don't know 100% that you can say anything that you need to that it's not a safe— it's not the safe space that you need. You know, they need a completely safe space to express their concerns.

Terry Hyde: So the other thing is that they will possibly— are more likely to talk about their injuries to the school. I've got an injured this, and then they go along to the physical therapist and the strength and conditioning coach, etc., that the school supplies. But there is this other than the stigma, there is a thought from the student or the dancer that they're weak. There's a sign of weakness, and so that's why they probably won't even go to the school counselor or the company counselor.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, yes, and I know that that's true in other athletes as well, and I think that that's the other thing with dancers is that they are both artist and athlete. And so this entire conversation is also relevant for athletes. It's different for athletes, but I think that it's useful information for so many people. Absolutely. So is there anything else that you would like to add, Terry?

Terry Hyde: Yes. I'm in the process of writing a book, Mental Health Self-Care for Dancers, which should be out in October to run in line with the— I think it's the UK's Mental Health Day, which is in October. So it'll be coming out then, all ready for Christmas presents.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, perfect. I know what will be on my next wish list that I publish every year— your book.

Terry Hyde: Okay, thank you very much.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I think Jen and I will have to get boxes of those shipped here to the States.

Terry Hyde: It will be on print on demand, so you'll be getting them in your own country.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Perfect, perfect. Eco-friendly as well then.

Terry Hyde: So yes, that's right. Thank you very much for having me on your podcast.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, wonderful. Well, thank you again so much, Terry, for coming on the program today. You have been listening to Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD. And today my guest co-host has been Jennifer Milner, and this has just been such a great conversation. Terry, we can't thank you enough for sharing your wisdom and knowledge with us.

Well, great. Well, we'll catch you next time on the Bendy Bodies Podcast. Thank you again. Please go to bendybodieспodcast.com for links to all the episodes and to access the show notes. If you enjoyed this podcast, please share, leave a review, and consider rating us 5 stars. Don't forget to subscribe so you will be notified of all new episodes. Feedback is greatly appreciated and can be emailed to bendybodyspodcast@gmail.com. Go to hypermobilitymd.com to sign up for my newsletter. My guest co-host Jennifer Milner can be reached at jennifer@jennifer-milner.com. That's M-I-L-N-E-R. Thank you to Rhett Gill for production and sound editing, to Andrew Savino for composing our original music, and to Jennifer Arsenault for designing the Bendy Bodies website and cover artwork. This podcast is for informational purposes only and is not a substitute for medical advice. Please see your own medical team prior to making any changes to your healthcare. Thanks for tuning in, and we'll see you next time on Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD.
