---
num: 5
title: >-
  5. Optimizing Nutrition to Support a Dancer’s Health with Kristin Koskinen,
  RDN
date: '2020-04-04'
duration: 1h 3m
description: "While many dancers strive to fuel healthily, making the most out of your meals can be overwhelming. In today’s world especially, dancers need strong immune systems and healthy bodies ready for whatever challenge may come next. \nRegistered dietician nutritionist Kristin Koskinen discusses nutritional needs for dancers and how to shape lifelong healthy eating habits. Kristin examines common mistakes dancers make in fueling choices, and how you can shape a flexible diet built to shift around external factors. She’ll explore creating flexible strategies like a Ballet Bento Box and discuss the base requirements of any foundationally strong diet. \nAdditionally, Kristin lists immune-boosting nutrients and how to find them in foods; explores why stress causes nutritional deficiencies; and explains why removing common inflammatory foods from your diet might help your overall health. Join us for this important discussion! As Kristin points out, “What you do now defines how long and how strong you dance.” \nLearn more about Dr. Linda Bluestein, the Hypermobility MD, at our websites and be sure to follow us on social media: Websites: https://www.hypermobilitymd.com and www.BendyBodiesPodcast.comInstagram: @hypermobilitymd\_Twitter: @hypermobilityMD\_Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hypermobilityMD/\_Pinterest: https://www.pinterest.com/hypermobilityMD/\_LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/hypermobilitymd/\_\nAnd follow guest co-host Jennifer Milner at the links below:\_Website: www.jennifer-milner.com\_Instagram: @jennifer.milner\_Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/jennifermilnerbodiesinmotion/"
tags:
  - Nutrition
  - Hypermobility
audioUrl: >-
  https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH7636355954.mp3?updated=1721669963
videoUrl: 'https://youtu.be/I-DTMRCTThU'
snippets: []
guests:
  - 'Kristin Koskinen, RDN'
guestImages: []
---
[00:35] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Welcome to Bendy Bodies. This is your guest co-host Jennifer Milner, here with Dr. Linda Bluestein for another episode of this dance-specific series. Today we are so fortunate to be chatting with registered dietitian nutritionist and dancer Kristin Koskinen. Kristin pursued a career in dietetics to find the answers to her questions about nutrition and its impact on health and performance. She owns a private practice where she offers virtual nutrition counseling with a focus on performance nutrition. She incorporates the functional aspects of food in her approach to help artistic athletes of all levels, including those who've retired from dance. Her integrative approach recognizes that nutrition isn't just about the food you eat. It's important to take many factors into consideration, including individual biochemistry, environment, cultural influences, social norms, and body image, especially when working with dancers. Kristin is a founding member of DanceMed and is regularly invited to speak on topics related to dancer health and is a frequent contributor to media including Dance Magazine, Shape, Oprah, Healthline, NBC, and Today.com. Hi, Kristin. Welcome to Bendy Bodies.

[02:01] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: Hello, thank you so much for having me.

[02:04] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely. I can't wait to dive into our topic today. So before we start with the questions that we have lined up for you, can you give us some background on your life and just how you ended up as a nutritionist?

[02:18] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: Sure. Well, as you mentioned, I'm a dancer. I grew up dancing in a pre-professional ballet company. And there was a lot of talk about diets and weight loss, but not much about how to eat to support performance. Nutrition was essentially equated with weight loss. And in the culture then, as there unfortunately is now, thinner meant being better. It was better in ballet. And by the time I was 12 or 13, I found that I was restricting what I ate to watch the number on the scale go down. I was a normal weight and no one had ever suggested that I should lose weight, but it was clear that thinner dancers were serious dancers and I wanted to be taken seriously.

But in spite of that, interestingly, my artistic director was the first person to introduce me to the concept of nutrient timing. And that's the idea of what to eat and when to support your performance. And that combined with watching Rocky Balboa swallow raw eggs were really my introduction to sports nutrition. So then I retired from ballet and I went on to college where I switched from ballet to cheerleading and I studied biology and psychology intending to go to medical school. However, my biochem prof knew that my end goal was nutrition and recommended that I switch gears to pursue a master's in nutrition, which I actually did.

After I finished school, I worked as a clinical dietitian. That means I worked in a hospital setting. And then I took some time off to be at home with our five kids, and I even homeschooled them for several years. I love teaching. I find it really rewarding, and that was an interesting part of my life that I wouldn't have forecasted. So then as the kids grew and went to school, I decided to go into private practice because I wanted to practice functional nutrition, and I really wanted to be who I needed when I was dancing and who a lot of people need when they're looking to take care of their own health and well-being.

You know, healthcare is what we do at home. Sick care is what happens in hospitals. When I was working in a hospital, I was taking care of sick people. I really wanted to—which is wonderful and we absolutely need that—I just wanted to be on the other end of things, giving people more control over their own health and destiny. So I take a holistic approach in my practice where I emphasize long-term health and wellness, using food and nutrition to support the body's natural processes, including recovery, athletics, immunity. And I really try to emphasize how foods make my clients feel. Sometimes the emphasis is more physiologic, and sometimes it's more emotional, but we're always mindful of where we're sourcing and how that goes.

[05:19] Dr. Linda Bluestein: There's so many things about that that I love, including the concept that healthcare is what we do at home, and hopefully if we do that, we don't end up at the hospital needing the sick care. So exactly, that is a great way to look at it. It's not really a luxury to be trying to eat healthy foods, it's a necessity. It's like prehab instead of rehab.

[05:40] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: Oh, exactly, I love it. You know, when I talk to our—when I talk to our dance PT friends, it's the same thing. They, you know, what they can do, what we can do ahead of time is so much more powerful than if we wait to fix things. The prevention, it really is the best cure.

[06:02] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely. I agree with you. One of the things we look at in the circles that the three of us travel in is that balance between dancers being the artist but also being the athlete. And so many times we work on finding that perfect aesthetic, right, trying to make ourselves look a perfect way. And in my line of work, it might be that they're cheating the way their hip is used to get a beautiful line when that's just not physiologically how they're built. And in your line, it might be cheating their fueling in order to have a specific kind of aesthetic and a kind of look. And going beyond that, what are some of the typical mistakes that dancers make in the way that they fuel themselves?

[06:48] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: Oh yeah, absolutely. You know, they are artistic athletes. And when we look at the psychology of the dancer, we need to look at the psychology of the dancer. And there's this spectrum that we find a dancer falls on in that term. So they, some really view themselves as artists and others really embrace the athletic component of dance. Most people fall someplace in the middle, but no matter what, they are artists and this idea of line—ballet is really kind of my main area and line. And line tends to be, we look at the beauty of a thin line. And so we drive a lot of thin ideologies, which drives dancers to under-eat, which drives them toward fad diets. And some of the diets they even pick up may actually have an appropriate role for other people. Keto is a big one. Like keto has a—can be used therapeutically for great results. It's not a place that dancers should be.

So I think they get caught up in fad diets, they underfuel, they use artificial means to elevate their energy levels, which is really just robbing yourself from another day, whether it's caffeine or energy drinks or sugar. And it just drives things in the wrong direction. And what we want to do—the dance medicine field as a whole is really looking at longevity in dance. We're not looking at the dancer retiring at 18 or 22 or even 30. We're looking at dancers dancing well into their 50s or maybe even 80. And what you do now impacts how long and how strong you can dance.

So, did I dance around the question?

[08:55] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Nope. I don't think so. What I heard was that some of the things that you commonly see are under-eating, looking at fad diets, just underfueling in general, and then sort of artificially raising energy levels as well. Is there, in this grouping of things that we see a lot, because I see those same things, and I like that you specifically talked about artificially raising energy levels because a lot of dancers do that, overdosing on coffee or shooting a Pixie Stick before they have to go on to do Swan Lake or whatever. But another common thing that I see is just not knowing what and when to eat.

Do you see that as a common thing too, that they're not necessarily trying to avoid eating healthy, but they don't know when can I eat a bigger meal and when should I eat less and when should I eat this type of, like, when should I eat more fat-heavy or protein-heavy and when should I eat healthy carbs? Do you see that kind of thing commonly as well?

[09:57] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: All the time, all the time. And, you know, and that is okay. That's actually a decent place to be because that's sports nutrition. That's specific knowledge that we want to layer into a sound diet. So this is part—so if I'm working with a dancer or any athlete, but specifically dancers, we want to have a foundational diet. The trick is we need to be able to shift what they're eating depending on a lot of factors. So those factors could be where they are in their season, whether, you know, it is before—whether it's Nutcracker, whether it's before audition, if we're looking at the audition season, after we're coming off of Nutcracker and maybe a little bit of a break and then driving into the audition season during the winter, some associated issues there. Are they getting ready for summer intensives? How are they going to eat during intensives?

So all these things make those—make the particulars different, and they're going to be different for each person. I really try to work with dancers to find—to build flexibility into their, into their diets and meal plans. One of the ways I do that is with what I call the Ballet Bento. And about two years ago, I was really thinking about how can we educate dancers and provide real food solutions for them, whatever their needs are, that also turn them away from disordered eating. And I got thinking about it, and the bento is, is a beautiful tool for this. I use the bento as a tool. If I can start a dancer at eight years old, it's perfect. Kids at any age can do this. Dancers, dance professionals, PTs use these.

[11:45] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, I do it. You got me started doing it.

[11:48] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: Right, right, exactly. And I did it because of this: they're portable. You can take your healthy foods on the road. My dancers have been working with shelf-stable foods for a while because you can't depend that you're gonna have refrigerator space, or, you know, if you're at the theater, taking a cooler may or may not be an option for you. If you're traveling, that may or may not be an option for you. So we work on these things at the beginning.

And with the ballet bento, the one I use has six compartments, and that lets us build things up and prepare for the unexpected because there's always unexpected. What if you're more hungry? What if rehearsal runs long? What if you only have this much time to eat? What if you can only get your nutrition in in three bites? A big salad is a beautiful food, but that's not a good idea if you've got, you know, five minutes to get in what you need before you're being called back because guess what? We're gonna run it three more times because we flopped it before.

So creating flexible strategies that a dancer can go to and create on their own is really foundational to my work with this community. And as it turns out, it works really well with other people too. Now remind me what the question is because I'm now all in the ballet bento world.

[13:15] Dr. Linda Bluestein: No, you answered it because we were talking about starting out with a baseline of coming in not knowing what to eat and when to eat. And dancers might feel like that's a terrible place to start, but you were saying that's actually a great place to start because that's something that you can work with. Yeah. And then trying to find ways to learn how to do that in a flexible way, learning how to, like you said, create flexible strategies. And as we all know, dancers are masters at dealing with the unexpected and love being flexible and living in uncertain times. I'm saying sarcastically.

So dancers very much want rules that they can follow, and it sounds like part of what you do is teach them, here are the basic concepts, and now you have the tools to figure out how to work within this structure.

[14:12] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: Absolutely. And you're right. And the bento creates that structure. We are all about—and that is dance. You have—we have structure. Someone's always telling us what to do. There's a mirror. Someone says you're right, you're wrong. There are all these—the fundamentals and technique. After that, we can flex it out. But even with the parameters of a bento where you know, hey, you're going to put some protein in here and we can look—if I'm working with some, I can, I can give general recommendations and put lists together to help people get started.

If I'm working with someone specifically because they have specific needs, they really want to dial in their performance, they, um, they have a health condition that we need to do, we can still have lists of these are your options and now do it. And, and it's reliable and it can take a lot of pressure off, um, and remove a lot of anxiety when you just know you're gonna be okay. And you—it's very figureoutable.

[15:13] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That sounds completely doable, and it sounds like it gives dancers the flexibility they need. So I love that concept. Like I said, you've got me—you already have me doing it.

[15:26] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: Yay! I love it. I do too. Every time I make one up, I look at them like, oh, this makes me so happy.

[15:35] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Gosh, I love hearing that. That really makes my day. So, so it's great to have that flexibility. It's great to have that knowledge of, of knowing that you can have that structure and then have stuff to put in it. One of the things dancers deal with regularly is that we push ourselves too much and that we're running on fumes, and sometimes we need to think beyond what do I need to eat in the next four hours. Sometimes we need to think my body is running completely on empty. What are some changes that I need to make to help keep my immune system strong? And especially in today's world, it's even more important than ever to keep that immune system strong. Are there specific nutrients that dancers can focus on to help keep their immune system elevated?

[16:21] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: Absolutely. So there are—generally speaking, I'm always going to go back to we want to foundationally strong diet. We want the fuel you're putting in your body on a regular basis. You know, if that's the tank, we don't want to run our tanks down to zero, and we want to have these nutrients accessible on the regular. We don't want to just fill the tank, top it off, and then spray the entire car with things thinking that that's going to solve the problem.

So let's start foundationally and if we're not there, that's okay. We're going to start where we are. We do know there are certain nutrients that are imperative for immunity. And part of the way we know about the role of specific nutrients and immunity is by looking at undernutrition. And we understand that well when we look at areas impacted by food shortages or famines or explore nutrition status in developing countries. However, we can impose the same nutrient deficiencies on ourselves by dieting, under-fueling, not paying attention, not practicing the self-care of eating the foods our bodies actually need.

I think immunity really gets pushed to the side with dancers because they tend to operate—it's in the here and now, it's in this performance. It's a mess versus for the long term, you're gonna need this immunity strong and going. So some of the nutrients of focus we would look at straight away would include vitamins A, vitamin C, vitamin D, vitamin E, selenium, zinc, and then there are a host of plant chemicals that can support immunity as well. But nutrients of focus we're really going to dial in on are those nutrients. They conveniently tend to come packaged in fruits and vegetables.

Some of them we may need to supplement or layer in. They also come—some of them may be more reliably available to the body in an animal product, and we would talk about that with dancers too. I know a lot of dancers come to me and they want to have a vegan diet. And when we talk about plant-based, there's, I'd like to clarify this because it's really important, especially with a lot of documentaries we're seeing come out these days. Plant-based doesn't necessarily mean vegan. It means the basis, the foundation of your diet is plants, and you can build other things into it. So it may include some animal products, and for most people I do recommend that because it can be challenging to have a diet that meets all your needs that's simply plant-based.

So for example, zinc. Zinc, we can find zinc in plant foods like legumes and whole grains, but those kinds of foods also come with a lot of fiber, which is awesome, but it can make it harder for—the fiber tends to hold on to the zinc, a bit more in the plant, and it can make it less easy for the body to actually access it. Other foods we want to think of when we're looking at the immune system include fermented foods. About 80% of your immune system is stationed in your gut, and how we feed the gut, how we treat the gut, influences what we call the microbiota. That's all the microorganisms from parasites and viruses and bacteria there's a whole host of them that live in your gut.

So we want to feed those well, and we also want to take care of the gut tissue. So fermented foods can be very supportive for the general population. For specific populations, we might not want to use fermented foods. Fiber is generally a good one to support the gut. Vitamin A is found in a lot of plant foods, including—we think of it in yellow and orange foods like carrots and squash and cantaloupe. It can also be in dark leafy greens where the chlorophyll covers the vitamin A. And this is a precursor to vitamin A. It's not active vitamin A, but dark leafy greens are another good source. Mango. You can get vitamin A in its pre-done form, which is going to be, again, it's easier for the body to absorb in liver or egg yolks.

Vitamin C, we know, is found in citrus fruits, Brussels sprouts, berries of all kinds. It's really pretty easy to get a hold of in whole food form. Vitamin E, pretty much the same. We find it in seeds and nuts and more fat-based plant foods. And vitamin D is a little bit of an outlier. Our best source tends to be the sun. However, most dancers aren't getting enough sun. It's not readily available in food sources. You can get it in fortified dairy, fortified orange juice. It is present in egg yolk, grass-fed and finished meats will have some, as well as mushrooms that have been exposed to UV light.

But a lot of people just aren't eating enough of those foods to meet their immune and function needs. And when we look at—it's important to—when we talk about how much is enough, because that becomes a question. Is it the RDA? Eh. I look at the RDA as a starting point. That's what's going to prevent a blatant deficiency. Like, blatant deficiency of vitamin D is rickets. A blatant deficiency of vitamin C is scurvy. But when we are—when our bodies are under a lot of stress, whether it's emotional stress like what a lot of people are experiencing now, whether it's physical stress, what we experience when we're dancing, have intense dance schedules and training schedules, or both, the body draws on a lot of these nutrients.

So you may need more. Some people may even need some additional support from supplements. Stress is a big one, and what people may not understand is your body doesn't disseminate between physical stress and emotional stress. It reads stress as stress, and it's gonna—fight or flight comes into play. And your adrenal glands control a lot of the hormonal processes that drive these responses, and your adrenal glands also house most of your vitamin C which is a good indicator of how important it is for the stress response because the location makes it very rapidly accessible to producing the hormones you need for stress response.

And so if you're under a lot of stress, your vitamin C demand may actually escalate. So if you've been under a lot of stress, what people find is like, oh, I was under, you know, wow, I'm so busy, it was Nutcracker, and then I just like crashed and got sick. Or they find they're under a lot of pressure and then they crash and get sick, it may be in part because they're burning through their stores and they're not refueling the vitamin C stores to the degree they need to on the regular to keep them healthy. And that may be part of the crash. There are other things too, but, but it can be a contributor.

Vitamin D, not getting enough vitamin D because dancers don't go outside. They don't expose their skin. Even when they can go outside in the summer, if it's summer break, they're at intensives. So, you know, we've got to address that and make sure that they're covered.

[24:21] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely. I love—it sounds to me like you're not saying eat almonds and you'll be fine. I think we as a society love to find that next big thing. I know for a while it was goji berries, right, or whatever it is, and people think, well, I'm just going to eat a bunch of these and I don't have to do anything else. I think we're realizing there's no magic bullet, that it's a wide variety, and there are lots of great superfoods, but there's not one superfood. And so we have to, we have to get a wide variety is what you're saying, which we all hear, but we don't like to believe because we love shortcuts, right?

[25:00] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: Well, and you know, okay, so I'm going to tell on myself a little bit here. When I was dancing, I saw Total cereal, okay, and it was like, Total, it's got 100% of all these things you need. And my logic was if I just eat total cereal three times a day, boom, I've done it and I don't have to think about it anymore, right? I got 100%. Yeah, that's not the way that works, sweetheart. And when we're getting our nutrition from food, we're getting what I call the speck of dust theory.

So the emerging science, science is always emerging, we're always learning more. And when you get your nutrition from, you know, the whole food source like potatoes or carrots or grapes or whatever, you're also getting phytochemicals, which we don't classify in—the federal government doesn't, doesn't regulate that. They don't monitor it. It's just not something that's there, but they're super important. So resveratrol, quercetin, rutin, these are all plant compounds that come in your food that support immunity, that are anti-inflammatory, that are best taken in food form.

So yeah, when we eat the food, we're hitting those bases. And there is no one food. It's really a broad swath of foods is our best bet. If we need to limit foods for certain reasons, like, you know, like right now, you can get what you can get because that's where we're at. You go to the store, you may not be able to find things. We can work with that, but on the whole and in normal circumstances, definitely go for a broad variety of plant-based foods and layer in well-sourced animal products.

[26:47] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, I love that. I do wanna get into supplements, and I know Linda has several questions for you on that. And to start that off though, I wanted to circle back to—you mentioned fermented foods and how important they were for the gut. Do you include, or do you see a place for probiotics as well, which I know is a supplement, but do you see probiotics being as effective or helpful as the fermented foods? Yeah, I think that, you know, I'm talking about capsules as well as, you know, taking yogurt, but also the capsules that, that you can take to try to increase that?

[27:25] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: Yeah, I think probiotics definitely have a place, and the interesting thing is when we talk about probiotics, there's not just one, and we can actually look at what strains, different strains of bacteria, offer different benefits. And depending, and I'll tell you this, it's always, the answer is always going to be, it depends. So in the general community, yes, probiotics are typically, can typically be beneficial. If we want to get really specific and we have specific health concerns, we might want to look at what formulation of our probiotic we're using.

For example, someone with allergies may benefit from using a particular strain of probiotic. If someone has what we call small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, SIBO, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, we may not want to do that because there's already a problem where bacteria are where they're not supposed to be, and we might—we need to resolve the underlying problem, and we don't want to necessarily fuel the fire with throwing more on. That's going to be a specific case-by-case measure.

Even with the fermented foods, for the—if we're looking at the dancers specifically with hypermobility who may have mast cell activation concerns, histamines can be a problem. And we're going to say, no, we don't want to do fermented foods there because that can drive other issues for those dancers. So it starts to become a little bit of a dance with the specifics. Generally speaking, yes. But when we're looking at the human body, N always equals one. What works for me will not necessarily work for someone else. What works for me today may not work for me in ten years, may need to be shifted depending even on the day of the week, where a person is in, or a female is in her cycle, where we are in the calendar year, where we are in our work year, where we are in the seasons.

So we're always mindful of these things and how we may need to shift and adjust.

[29:43] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Excellent, thank you. Yeah, and, and I'm really glad that you brought up SIBO, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, because that is something that people with hypermobility disorders are definitely at increased risk of, of having. And they can have a lot of those symptoms of, you know, bloating and, you know, discomfort after meals and things like that that are vague enough that it can take quite a bit of time before they can actually get that diagnosis. So I'm really glad that you brought that up, that while probiotics might be really great for one group of people, they're not going to be great for another group of people. Right. That's so important.

And what are your thoughts about supplements in general, and are there certain circumstances under which you do encourage supplements?

[29:44] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: My idea on supplements in general is we want to start with the diet, and then we use supplements to do just that, to supplement, to build in where we may have gaps. And a lot of people have gaps because of what food is available, increased demand, and their physiologic needs and demands. Our food supply is not—the nutrient density of our food supply is not what it was many years ago, our bodies have to fight a host of toxins constantly. Our bodies are under attack on the regular from pesticides, what your neighbor sprays in their yard, the fumes the Marleys are putting off. I mean, you know, the crap we're dealing with with Wi-Fi, and it's—there's a lot for our bodies to deal with.

So generally speaking, yeah, I definitely use supplements in my practice. They're not—I don't have a specific formulary, and not every—I don't necessarily think it's appropriate. Even, I'll tell you what, even with the lead time. So I'm not going to lead with someone, particularly a dancer, with a lot of supplements at any one time because it can give the false sense of security like, oh, but I'm taking this, so I don't need to pay attention to the diet. But your supplements aren't going to provide the curcuminoids that you get from eating turmeric that you put into the Indian dish that you're enjoying.

And so I'm really particular about how when we bring these into the program, how psychologically the client takes it. So that's part of it. But vitamin D, honestly, almost across the board, people just aren't getting enough. They spend too much time inside. If people have any sort of issues with liver or kidney or absorbing certain nutrients that support those organs, they can fall short. I always pair vitamin D with vitamin K2 to make sure that the vitamin D goes where we want it and doesn't settle in soft tissues like the arteries and blood vessels.

Yeah, I think a high-quality—we'll pause there. Let's talk about high quality. When we're looking at supplements, it's really, really important to take a high-quality supplement. What that means is you're getting what you think you're getting, it's not been doctored up with things you don't want or things that can hurt you, it's free of contaminants, it's been stored properly so that the active ingredients are still active when you get them and it's efficacious, like it's gonna do what it's supposed to do because it's been processed properly.

So we want to look at high-quality supplements. Those typically aren't going to come off the shelf from Target. You are probably going to—your best bet is to consult with your healthcare provider who will have access to a dispensary or to get them from a pharmacy. Those are my initial—I just, I recently wrote, I have a blog on supplements, like Supplements 101, if listeners want to check that out.

And we want to know what's coming in our supplements. Like I've seen, I saw a supplement come out with colloidal silver. Now colloidal silver is antibacterial and antimicrobial. Topically, it can also lead you to having permanently discolored skin. So some of these really—they're really cute supplements that we're seeing advertised on social media have some things in there with some—you might not anticipate that as a side effect, having your eyes discolored for life because someone threw some, you know, and it sounds fancy, right? I mean, but unless you are under the specific care of a healthcare provider who practices functional and integrative medicine, who understands how to apply that specifically to your case for a limited duration and when to pull it out, don't go there.

That's one of the reasons we wanna, when we're looking at supplements, they're very thoughtful. It's really, this is, we're looking at, this is—it's almost pharmaceutical when you look at it because the interplay matters. If people say, oh yeah, I heard zinc's great for your immunity, I'm gonna start sloshing down the zinc. Well, that's fine, but if you overdo it, you can end up with a copper deficiency because copper and zinc compete for absorption. If you end up with a copper deficiency, you're gonna have a host of problems including being immunocompromised. So you've circled around and caused a new problem.

[35:23] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So, so you mentioned you want to be under the, the guidance of a healthcare professional. So let me ask you really quick on this: licensed nutritionist, registered dietitian, healthcare coach—there's so much out there on the internet and through social media and people with these titles. How do we, how do we differentiate, and how do we know what we're looking for as far as who is really qualified to hand out this kind of information.

[35:49] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: Right, so what you say matters. So for example, the term doctor. You can go to a doctor who's a doctor of philosophy who you probably don't want, you know, in teaching philosophy in your university. You don't want that person necessarily managing your healthcare. They can be brilliant, but not in the ways you need them to be brilliant. A registered dietitian is a specific designation. A diet—registered dietitian or registered dietitian nutritionist is the same thing. It's just how we choose to—it's a moniker choice. But that's the same as someone who puts letters after the name. It's a legal designation, just like MD for a medical doctor, a DO for a doctor of osteopathy, an ND for a naturopathic doctor, a chiropractor, a PT for physical therapy, and a DMD, a DDS, all these healthcare providers have regulations based on that they have gone through a process to get where they are that is outlined and consistent.

So for a dietitian, that means they have a minimum of a four-year degree with coursework that includes, but it is not limited to, biochemistry, microbiology, physiology, nutrition sciences, you know, that's a baseline. They also have passed rigorous board exams, and this is, and you know, you hear the same for physicians, dentists, all, all of us have done these things. And then they have continuing education to stay, that they're required to do to stay abreast in the field or in the particular area of practice where they are.

So my continuing education, I am every day, I am reading medical journals, nutrition posts, all the things about what I do. And even though I understand school nutrition and how that works, and you'll find dietitians there, I don't practice school dietetics. And I would refer, and if you needed someone like that, I would refer you out. So even within the field, what Linda does as a functional and integrative practitioner, she's going to have a knowledge base about a lot of these things that others won't. Her knowledge about hypermobility and pain management is going to give her a unique perspective that even if you went to another doctor and they can know a lot of things, they may not be able to dial that in.

So one, you want to make sure you have a licensed credentialed practitioner. Then you want to make sure that that practitioner meets the needs you're looking for. You know, we don't want to send our sons to gynecologists necessarily. They might, they might be missing some bases. So that's, that's really important. There is no such thing like after you have a registered dietetics degree and those qualifications, there are certain programs you can pick up additional certifications. You can have a certification as a diabetes educator, as a sports nutritionist. There are things that you can do, but there is no broadly accepted, nationally accepted, internationally accepted certified nutritionist—I'm saying that in air quotes—or even health coach. They can offer—a health coach can offer to you some great support, but they cannot offer you the kind of background and knowledge and understanding that a dietitian is going to have because of what they bring in and the understanding they have about the body and how people work and why the questions we're going to ask to get to where you are and what approach we're going to take because we're—it's very layered.

So what may sound like a simple question if you ask me a question or I'm looking at someone, I've run that through, I'm running that through, you know, a layer of filters to decide where we want to go next. It's because there is no formulary. There is no, we do this, then we do this, we prescribe this. That's not the way. You can do that, but that's not the way it actually works.

[35:49] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I think that this is such an important point, and I'm so glad, Jen, that you asked this question, because I think as you're explaining you're explaining this, Kristin, it's making me realize too that when people are getting a simple answer or something that sounds too good to be true, I think that's how a lot of people do end up being successful at convincing people to try things that maybe are not in their best interest because they make it just sound so great. But like you're saying, you're thinking of all of these different scientific things and the body is so incredibly complicated, and so that's why you don't have like one single answer for, for everyone that is going to work in every single person every single time, because there's just so many variables that you have to factor into consideration.

Absolutely, and you know, another thing that a dietitian—not all dietitians, but something that a dietitian or a dietitian who works in concert with other health professionals will have access to is different levels of testing. So if we have questions about things, so for it, we can test and not guess. A lot of times we can use a clinical approach and based on physical signs and symptoms and what you're eating and a number of inputs, we can choose a right direction. But we also have access to these high-level supplements that other people don't have, you know, that a multi-level marketing coach isn't going to have available to them. And we're going to be able to test to see how's this all working and what parameters do we have. And a dietitian is going to work in concert with your other healthcare providers if it's, you know, when it's appropriate to make sure we're getting great results. And when we're looking at communities or populations with, with high-level needs or specific needs, we might need to get to that level of complication.

And things I would start with a dancer who has hypermobility, is someplace on the hypermobility spectrum, I'm going to start at a much different place than I'm going to start with a dancer who doesn't, including maybe, you know, we might pull out some testing right away to start addressing some of these gut or SIBO or other issues or inflammatory issues to mitigate the process.

And what test results would you want to see in a perfect world? And let's say it is somebody with hypermobility. When you're first starting to see them, what test results would you like to see?

[35:49] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: In an ideal world, I'll take all the tests. I want all the data. Give them to me. I'll sort through it. I love it. I want everything. But that's not really reasonable. Okay, so for example, even if it, we're not really talking about thyroid and that's a little off, but I see clients come to me, adult clients, they're like, "Oh, everything's fine. I don't have a thyroid. My primary care provider did a thyroid test and they took one parameter out of at least four that we want to look at to actually gauge where you're at." It's like, "Oh man, that one TSH." No, that's not the end of the story.

So I want to see the depth of testing too. If I had to choose, my top picks would be, I would go for a micronutrient panel and I would go for an MRT test because I, in my practice, I found a lot of success using the results. An MRT test essentially looks at what foods a person specifically has adverse reactions to. So, and they can be even healthy foods. So I have a client who is very, she's really reactive to quinoa, basil, chicken. I mean, things that people think is healthy foods. Bananas. And when we took those out of her diet and were able to give her other healthy options, her eczema went away, brain fog cleared.

We can get some really good results. Everyone's going to respond differently, but when we're looking at connective tissue concerns, and we are connective tissue, our gut, when we're looking at the fragility of that, I wanna see what can we do to just, celiac disease is a big concern with Ehlers-Danlos and sometimes the ensuing mood issues that we might see from things leaking through the gut and hitting the rest of the body that can impact our mental status. So those would be the ones I would go with first, and that gives, you know, with those two I get a lot of information.

[35:49] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely, absolutely. And when it comes to the hypermobile population, whether they have Ehlers-Danlos or hypermobility spectrum disorder or, you know, a different hypermobility condition, but for that population, which of course we know does affect dancers more than the general population, how do you approach their diet differently than a non-hypermobile person's?

[35:49] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: Well, someone with hypermobility is going to come in with a lot. They're going to have some, some other—we're looking at them differently because they're going to a lot of times come with different health concerns. So like, like we talked about SIBO or GI distress, or, you know, all these things that we want to approach first. So my first approach is going to be, I'm going to look at the gut. We're going to talk about nutrient timing and a lot of those things and maybe more the sports nutrition performance items a little later, because if we put that ahead of tending to the gut, we're gonna miss a lot.

So I want to make sure that that GI system is in the best form we can get it, and it may not be perfect or ideal, but we want it at its best, whatever that is. Just like extension, what your feet are, we want them to be the best they are. We can't cheat this. So a gut-friendly diet may be in part removing offending foods, so foods that are pro-inflammatory. We know there, there are some known pro-inflammatory food choices. Gluten, soy, corn, dairy, sugar. A dancer who comes to me with the hypermobility spectrum, we're gonna start off by getting rid of gluten. Why? Because gluten is known to drive zonulin, which drives gaps in the intestine, which can lead to these subsequent hyper-inflammatory—these subsequent inflammatory issues with other food sources.

So we're gonna pull gluten right away. I don't necessarily I'm not going to necessarily do that with every dancer. I am going to do that with my hypermobile dancers because it's just, to me, a no-brainer. We're going to look at the kinds of fiber that work to support that gut. If they're coming with some other, you know, known issues, do we need to rule out SIBO? Do we need to do some specific testing for that? A lot of that I'll have them do with their primary care provider because it tends to be cheaper, easier to do.

Do they need to maybe go on a low histamine diet temporarily or for the long term based on their concerns? We're going to look at that. Do they, do they respond differently to different kinds of foods? So we talk about apples and onions and grapes as being wonderful foods, high in fiber. They offer quercetin and some of these resveratrol and some of these other phytonutrients we've talked about. But if a dancer's GI is such that it gives them gas distension and bloating, we might want to try what's called a FODMAP diet, which is a temporary—it's a temporary thing, but it's a therapeutic approach to pulling some foods out. We'll see how the body responds, and then we'll bring things back in slowly. So we can maximize the diversity in their diet.

I'm probably going to be really quick to bring in hydrolyzed collagen with, with someone with a bendier body. Why? Because we know that when we—with elemental nutrients, that means we break them down to their, their most, their smallest form, like protein—they are more readily available to the body. Hydrolyzed collagen, has been broken down to smaller peptides which are readily absorbed. And there's some research that even suggests that those peptides, after they're absorbed, indicates that the body needs to actually produce more collagen. So we need collagen to heal the gut and for all the connective tissue. We need it for bone, which is also connected to tissue, so I'm gonna bring that in. Whether it has a direct response or not, we don't have all the answers, we don't know, but it's not gonna hurt. So that's something I would bring in right away. It's a low to no risk outing.

[35:49] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That all sounds great, and when it comes to, we talked briefly about mast cell activation syndrome earlier, And also, we've talked a little bit, of course, about chronic inflammation. Can you just talk a little bit more about both of those things and how—you've mentioned some foods that can definitely potentially increase inflammation. Are there certain foods that, in terms of mast cell activation syndrome and/or inflammation, certain things that can actually improve those things?

[35:49] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: Yeah, well, with mast cell activation, a lot of it is—with inflammation, a lot of our first approach is removing offenders. So things that drive histamine or that come as, that actually deliver histamine, we wanna pull out. So specific foods would be fermented foods, aged foods like salamis and cheeses, leftovers even. So we wanna pull, we wanna be really cautious with those. In the diet. Foods that are known to be and that have a wealth of historic and scientific evidence as being anti-inflammatory include ginger, cinnamon, garlic. We'd want to be a little careful with that one with, with certain, certain clients that could that can drive them in the wrong direction. Green tea. Let's see, what else am I thinking of? Any—resveratrol that comes from grapes and those kinds of things.

And so ideally we eat them in the whole food form, but if we can't because they, you know, other components of the food may drive inflammation, we can get them in supplement form too and really actually get a a high load of say cinnamon or ginger or turmeric as opposed to eating the food form and that can be really helpful. There are studies, there are some studies that are fairly new that show that dosing with around 2,400 milligrams of cinnamon divided over the course of the day can help with menstrual pain. Now is that all kinds of pain? No. Is it a specific, was it a specific study? Yes. Can we extrapolate that? Yeah. Would I add some cinnamon to the food I'm eating, particularly Ceylon cinnamon as opposed to Saigon cinnamon, which is what you buy in the grocery store mostly? It's less—the Saigon's less expensive. Look for Ceylon. You probably have to order it. Could it offer some benefits? You bet.

Yeah, so I would totally pull those kinds of things in. I don't have a lot of experience experience with mast cell activation, and I would probably be looking at a colleague to help me out with that. But these are some starting points that we would lead with.

[35:49] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I love the tip about the cinnamon. I honestly have never heard that one before, and amongst my patients, the amount of menstrual pain is really, really significant. I mean, this is a problem that's super, super common, so I'm very curious to do a little bit more research on that myself because that sounds really intriguing. Yeah. And ginger, ginger, the same thing. And here's the thing too. When we look at a lot of these foods, what's important to know, and this is again why working with a healthcare practitioner can be super helpful, is it's like, well, I tried the cinnamon. We also know it can help with blood sugar control. So it's like, in a particular patient, I may not wanna give them that if they tend toward hypoglycemia, right? So we talk about this now, but if someone else says, "Oh yeah, I'm gonna do all the cinnamon," it could drive them in a wrong direction, and we might wanna time the cinnamon when they're taking it to make sure that they don't crash in the middle of class or performance.

So these are the things we layer in. Yeah, but it's, these are sometimes where we need to hit a threshold dose, and what we do, it's not a one and done. So these are things that might take, just like most, a lot of pharmacologic products take up to six weeks to hit a threshold and to actually be effective, it can be the same with your food, nutrition, or even supplements. Sometimes you'll see results almost immediately. Sometimes it may take time, to actually reveal its beautiful self.

And you really explained to us so well and so thoroughly the nuances to this and why it's so important to work with a nutritionist if you possibly can, rather than doing your own research, which is always going to be geared towards the general public. So this is such great information. And how would you recommend that people find a nutritionist that can specifically address their needs as a dancer or their needs as somebody with hypermobility or, you know, any other specific populations like that?

[35:49] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: I would recommend dancers head over to the International Association of Dance Medicine and Science, which we affectionately call IADMS, I-A-D-M-S. And I think if you search iadms.com, you'll, you'll go to the website where there is a directory of dance medicine specialists who—that's what they do, they work with dancers. And if—and you can contact—and a lot of them work virtually because, you know, one of the brilliant things about COVID is we are, you know, a lot of us are now—I work virtually, but a lot of us are working more virtually, you can contact any number of people, and if someone doesn't have the answer or can't help you, perhaps because their state licensure doesn't go over your state line, they can refer you to someone else.

And the network, this network is incredibly valuable because I can refer people, I refer people all the time to physical therapists or, you know, to Linda. Hey, check out Linda's site. There's a wealth of information and a wealth of skill and knowledge that these people are delighted and passionate. This is how we keep—this is how we stay involved with the dance world, even if whether we're dancing anymore or not.

[35:49] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, and it's such a collaborative group, and I really just love that about it. All three of us being members, of course, and being very actively involved. Yeah. And we've seen it. Yeah. Absolutely. For sure. Okay, great. And then what about, do we just want to maybe hit on just a couple more things here and we'll be wrapping up? Are there areas of nutrition that you hope to see more research on in the future?

[35:49] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: Oh, so many. And you know, and things are moving ahead so quickly and some of the things we're seeing now, like even hydrolyzed collagen in dancers and collagen in soft tissue and all these things. And sometimes it just takes time for things to reveal. But it's exciting. I think what I'd really like to see on the nutrition front is getting the information we already have to dancers now. And sometimes our best gateway to the dancers are the people who love them and teach them and looked after them. Dance parents, choreographers, artistic directors, teachers, the people who coordinate RDA, the Ballet Alliance, the people who take care of dancers and bring them together and provide education for them.

And if we can make this—make nutrition and give them the tools and the knowledge so they can make good decisions, if we can get that to dancers at any stage of the game, not just premier companies like like, you know, New York City Ballet or Miami or any of these. But if we could get this to dancers early on, we would, we would give them such a leg up in their careers and in their lives. Like, this is, these are skills that will last with them, just like the skills we learn in dance that, you know, that shape us. These things can shape people to have better lives.

[57:44] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, me too, me too. And is there anything else that we didn't ask you about that you'd like to add? And if you can make sure to let people know where to find you.

[57:45] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: Gosh, you know, I think, I think we covered pretty much everything. If there's anything that comes up, maybe, maybe we can do a part two and keep this encapsulated. Yes, I'm I'm glad to have people reach out to me. They can find me on my website, which is www.eatwellpros.com. You can find me on Instagram at my name, which is Kristin, K-R-I-S-T-I-N, underscore Koskinen, K-O-S-K-I-N-E-N, underscore R-D-N. You can find me on Facebook. I'm not there quite so much, or you can email me directly, and my email is kristin@eatwellpros.com.

[57:45] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wonderful. Well, it's been such a pleasure speaking with you today, and it's been so great to have Jennifer Milner, my guest co-host on this show again today as well. This has been so informative and is going to benefit so many people. It's so empowering for people to realize that there are things that they really can do to improve their health while they're dancing, in their life post-dance, and, you know, they can really just improve their quality of life so much from from all this information. So, so thank you so much, Kristin.

[59:34] Kristin Koskinen, RDN: Yes, thank you so much for having me. You know what, before I leave, I will leave with this for some quick resources available to dancers. And, and, and at the time of our recording, when we're in the midst of COVID-19, some things that I have—and this could change depending on when you're listening—but as of March 28th, I have an article in Dance Magazine that talks about the way people dancers can use shelf-stable foods to create meals and address nutrients, some of which we spoke about today. So zinc, vitamin A, vitamin C, that kind of thing. I would direct them to Dance Magazine to read that. On my Instagram account, I have links to a couple dance-specific handouts that I make available to dancers. One includes shelf-stable recipes that help support the dancer through this. And almost all of them, I actually made it so I think all of them are gluten-free. So for the populations who are looking for that, they can have that as well as some grab-and-go snacks for once we're through all of this and we're back in the studio, things that dancers can put together and start to put in their bentos. So I encourage them to go check out those resources.

[1:00:47] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's awesome. Yes, yes, that's all fabulous. So wonderful. I'm so glad that you mentioned those because people are definitely going to want to look at those resources as well. So, well, great. Well, you've been such a great guest today, Kristin, and thank you again, Jennifer. And you all have been listening to Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD. And today our guest has been Kristin Koskinen. Registered dietitian and nutritionist, and my guest co-host has been Jennifer Milner. It's been so fabulous having both of you here. Thank you so much for having me. It's been a, it's been a great time. Thank you. Absolutely.

Please go to bendybodies.org for links to all the episodes and to access the show notes. If you enjoyed this podcast, please share, leave a review, and consider rating us five stars. Don't forget to subscribe so you will be notified of all new episodes Feedback is greatly appreciated and can be emailed to bendybodyspodcast@gmail.com. Go to hypermobilitymd.com to sign up for my newsletter. My guest co-host Jennifer Milner can be reached at jennifer@jennifer-milner.com. That's M-I-L-N-E-R. Thank you to Rhett Gill for production and sound editing, to Andrew Savino for composing our original music, and to Jennifer Arsenault for designing the Bendy Bodies website and cover artwork. This podcast is for informational purposes only and is not a substitute for medical advice. Please see your own medical team prior to making any changes to your healthcare. Thanks for tuning in, and we'll catch you next time on Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD.
