---
num: 7
title: "7. Understanding and Preparing for Coronavirus with Immunologist, Dwight McKee, M.D."
date: "2020-04-17"
duration: "1h 7m"
description: "PLEASE NOTE***:  The following episode was recorded in mid-April 2020, just four weeks after the World Health Organization declared the spread of SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes the disease known as COVID-19) as a global pandemic. At that time, schools and all non-essential businesses had been closed and people around the world were being asked to stay home. Scientists were learning a lot at this point, but it was unclear how many people would become ill and what the excess mortality would be. Although there had been some understanding of post viral syndromes prior to the COVID pandemic (like dysautonomia following influenza), we would quickly learn that there would be serious long-term effects of COVID-19 that had never before been witnessed with any other virus.\nReady for some cutting edge COVID-19 science? In this episode, learn new tips and gain insight into the coronavirus situation! SARS-CoV-2, a novel coronavirus, has forever changed the world as we know it. \nWhy is this virus unique? \nWhy does the response to infection vary so dramatically? \nWhat can we do to minimize the risk of infection and decrease the impact if we get sick? \nDwight McKee, M.D. Ph.D. board certified in immunology, medical oncology, hematology, nutrition, and integrative medicine, shares his unique perspective on the Bendy Bodies Podcast. Dr. McKee discusses with Dr. Bluestein useful foods and supplements, psychosocial strategies and special considerations for people with pre-existing conditions. \nLearn more about Dr. Linda Bluestein, the Hypermobility MD at our websites and be sure to follow us on social media: Websites: https://www.hypermobilitymd.com and www.BendyBodiesPodcast.comInstagram: @hypermobilitymd Twitter: @hypermobilityMD Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hypermobilityMD/ Pinterest: https://www.pinterest.com/hypermobilityMD/ LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/hypermobilitymd/ \nAnd follow guest co-host Jennifer at the links below: Website: www.jennifer-milner.com Instagram: @jennifer.milner Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/jennifermilnerbodiesinmotion/"
tags:
 - "POTS"
 - "Nutrition"
 - "Hypermobility"
audioUrl: "https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH1297740290.mp3?updated=1721670708"
videoUrl: "https://youtu.be/CWI3xIZwZ_s"
snippets: []
guests:
 - "Dwight McKee, M.D"
guestImages: []
---
Dr. Linda Bluestein: Welcome to Bendy Bodies. This is your host, Dr. Linda Bluestein, here with Dr. Dwight McKee, MD, PhD, board certified in medical oncology, hematology, nutrition, and integrative and holistic medicine. Dr. McKee has completed research in both pharmacology and immunology. He has practiced complementary medicine with an emphasis in nutritional and body-mind medicine. In 2008, he co-authored a textbook on herb-nutrient and drug interactions, which is now widely used in medical schools and naturopathic colleges. He also works as the Scientific Director of LifePlus International, developing advanced nutraceutical formulations with an emphasis on support of the immune system, regulation of the cell cycle, and DNA protection. Dr. McKee spent 2 years doing immunology research at the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, California, and recently co-authored a peer-reviewed article with colleagues in Germany titled Candida Drugs Against SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19. I hope you will enjoy this scientific and sometimes geeky conversation filled with practical information for boosting immunity. As always, consult with your own healthcare team prior to making any changes to your treatment protocol. Dr. McKee, hello and welcome to Bendy Bodies. Thank you so much for joining me today.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Hi, Linda. Thanks for inviting me.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely. So great to chat with you today. So we're going to talk mostly about COVID-19 and in particular how it affects the bendy population that you and I know quite a bit about. And definitely that's how you and I met. So yeah, I know you have quite a bit of expertise in immunology and hematology and I'm just super eager to get your thoughts on this.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Yes, and nutrition.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And nutrition, yes. Oh my gosh, absolutely, and nutrition. So you have a perspective that is really quite unique and so valuable. So can you start out by telling us why COVID-19 is such a big deal and how this is different from other viruses?

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Well, you know, we're still learning new things about SARS-CoV-2, which is the name of the virus that causes the disease we call COVID-19. And what we do know is that we had coronavirus, highly pathogenic human-to-human coronavirus epidemics with SARS—severe acute respiratory syndrome—in the early 2000s, and then MERS in the Middle East. And SARS originated in China, was believed to be from a bat, as is SARS-CoV-2. MERS had its reservoir in a camel. And because these are closely related viruses, a lot of people have been going back and looking at the research that was done with the original coronaviruses. This one is more infectious, substantially more infectious, and not all the reasons for that are clear. There's no immunity in humans to this virus. But there was no immunity to the original SARS virus, except from—I mean, coronaviruses are part of the human virome that we are exposed to all the time. And many people get coronaviruses that are passed off as the flu or are very much like the common cold. SARS was the first one that was deadly, and in fact it was more deadly than this one, but much less infectious. So there was not as much global spread of the original SARS or MERS coronaviruses.

One thing that was recently discovered I heard on an interview that David Perlmutter was doing with a virologist in New York City who discovered that there are prion-like sequences in the—what's called the spike protein. You know, it's called the coronavirus because when you look at it under an electron microscope, you see all these little projections like you know, like a star or a sun, like a crown around it. That's where the name comes from. And those are called spike proteins.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Those spike proteins are what binds to receptors on human cells to gain entry to the cell. And this—and the receptor that SARS used is the same one that SARS-CoV-2 uses, which is the ACE2 receptor, which stands for angiotensin-converting enzyme 2. This is an enzyme that's involved in blood pressure regulation and many other aspects of physiology. And there are a lot of them on the lung cells called pneumocytes. They're also on macrophages. They're also on mast cells. They're also on endothelial cells. So the virus can gain entry into the lung cells. It can gain entry into the intestinal tract cells. Those are also loaded with ACE2 receptors. And it can gain entry into the bloodstream. Most infection—the most prominent organ of infection is the lungs. That seems to be the weakest link for people, and if they get this—and this was the case of SARS where it got the name severe acute respiratory syndrome—is because if the immune system overreacts in the lung and you get too much inflammation, you get leaking of fluids from the vascular system into the alveoli, the air sacs in the lungs, and people essentially drown.

So the thing that's clearly different about SARS-CoV-2 is that it is far more infectious than SARS-CoV-1, which caused the SARS outbreak in early 2000. And it appears not to be the virus that causes the morbidity and mortality, but a dysfunctional or exaggerated immune response to the virus, the so-called—what many people refer to as cytokine storm.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Interesting. Okay, so are people who have more autoimmune conditions or, you know, that kind of thing, are they more susceptible to cytokine storm or, you know, complications? Who is the most susceptible to getting these kind of complications from the virus?

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Well, you know, we don't really know yet. It was assumed that immunosuppressed people would be more at risk. But it's been—we have some experience with organ transplant recipients who are, you know, they have to take immunosuppressive drugs on a daily basis to prevent their immune system from rejecting the transplanted organ because it's a foreign tissue. So they are immunosuppressed by definition, but they've done fine with COVID-19. And it may be that the immunosuppressed might be a little more vulnerable to getting it, but you know, everybody's pretty vulnerable to getting it. And they actually may be somewhat protected because they don't get the exaggerated immune response. And people with autoimmune diseases are usually taking substances that suppress that autoimmune response, which may also suppress the cytokine storm response. So you know, we just don't really know.

We do know that people at risk are the elderly, and there's a pretty big difference between over 70 and over 80. The mortality risk with SARS over 80 goes up to about 10%. But I should say that mortality risk is also unknown, and it's very inflated because our ability to test the general population has been quite limited. So we know all of the cases that die, we—they're all documented to be COVID-19 cases that died. So that's the numerator, but we have no idea of the denominator. And as countries have begun to screen for antibodies, they're finding out people have been exposed and are immune who never had any symptoms or very mild symptoms. That they didn't—they would have never thought to go in and be tested because they didn't have fever, fatigue, headache, dry cough, the typical symptoms associated with it. So until we have population-wide testing, the mortality rate is going to appear much higher than it actually is.

And one is—many people are predicting that globally 60 to 70% of the population of the 7.5 billion people on the planet are going to get infected with this over the next year or so. But the one little experiment that we have that argues that it might be quite a bit lower was the Princess cruise ship. In which there was an outbreak and 20% of the people on board, including the crew and the passengers, 20% were infected. And there was a 1% mortality. And this was, you know, people in their 60s, 70s, and 80s primarily. It tends to be an elderly population on cruise ships.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure. That's really interesting. What do you have any theories as to the discrepancy there? Because, you know, 20% getting this versus 60% to 70%, and I've seen those 60% to 70% figures also, is quite a significant difference. And that's pretty fascinating. And do you have any theories about that?

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Well, I think historically with epidemics and pandemics, typically the predictions turn out to be worse than the reality. I think that's human nature to kind of be prepared for the worst and we also tend to kind of collectively panic. And you know, my philosophy is prepare for the worst and hope for the best. So certainly, you know, a 20% infection would be most preferable. My guess is that the—you know, the mortality rate in Korea, which were they South Korea, where they did extensive testing of the population, but by no means the entire population, was 0.6%, and in Germany, where they're doing a lot of testing, it's 0.4%. So I'm guessing that overall, the mortality is going to, you know, come out somewhere in that 0.5% range, which is 5 times as bad as the flu. But if the media were covering this year's influenza epidemic the way they've covered COVID-19, everybody would be panicked because 45 million people in the US got the flu and 50,000 people died of it.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wow. Yeah.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Which is a 0.1% mortality rate. But if every case was news and everybody would—everybody'd be terrified about the flu. So I think a lot of the—the media response has really kind of fanned the flames of panic, and the numbers that we're seeing in terms of mortality risk are vastly inflated because we have no clue at this point of the number of people who have already been infected, whether symptomatic or not, whether documented or not, and we won't until we are able to do widespread blood testing for specific antibodies to the SARS-CoV-2 virus, which is just, you know, just coming out, just beginning to be available.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure. And I think that part of the, you know, really scary thing for people is the stories that we hear about, you know, these young, healthy people who supposedly had no medical problems and got this and then died. Exactly. Yeah. And so that's, I think, you know, obviously none of us want elderly people to pass away either. But I think, you know, given that that's, you know, much more understandable—I think we can all wrap our brains around an elderly person getting influenza A or influenza B and getting complications and, you know, and not doing well with that. I think the scary thing for most of us is this idea of these young, reportedly healthy people. I have some theories on that as an anesthesiologist and having, you know, cared for people for many, many years of my life. But I would love to hear your perspective because you and I have such different backgrounds. Do you have any theories about that?

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Well, you know, one of the theories is that the young people who die from cytokine storm may be undiagnosed mast cell activation syndrome people who had mild symptoms. So which they get tired of telling the doctors who just kind of dismiss them. So they come up with a medical history that's quote unquote unremarkable. You know, this is a theory that Dr. Afrin, who leads our mast cell activation syndrome group, has put forward. Another theory that I have because of my focus on nutrition is that many young people today who are quote-unquote healthy tend to, you know, consume the industrialized food that is available, and they have many micronutrient deficiencies. They have an insufficient level of zinc, they have insufficient levels of vitamin D, they may, if they don't take multivitamins, they will have insufficient levels of vitamin A. And we know from the flu data that people who have blood levels of 25-hydroxy vitamin D, the storage form of vitamin D, over 40 nanograms per mL have a significantly lower incidence of influenza than do people with levels below 30.

30 is considered normal, but it was determined on what's very likely a vitamin D deficient population. So 30 is maybe average but not normal. If you look at free-living humans who are outside all day and not using sunscreen, typical 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels—whether it's the lifeguards in San Diego that have been studied or people in sub-Saharan Africa—they tend to have 25-hydroxy vitamin D levels in the 50 to 80 nanogram per mL range. And that's probably, you know, the healthy normal range. And vitamin D is a very fundamental player in the immune response as well as, you know, the traditional aspects that we were all taught about calcium metabolism and bone strength and so forth.

It's been found that high-dose zinc given with a 5-day course of high-dose zinc—we're talking, you know, 200 milligrams a day—along with the hydroxychloroquine, the Plaquenil, which has been used for malaria prophylaxis and treatment, although most malaria is now resistant to it, and also is used for autoimmune diseases like lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, that a 5-day course of Plaquenil has mild therapeutic effects by itself, but when given with high-dose zinc, there have been—this hasn't been studied yet in a randomized trial, but the clinical experience with it is that the hospitalizations are far below the 20% that are expected when you combine high-dose zinc with chloroquine.

IV vitamin C also, you know, oral vitamin C to bowel tolerance seems to be useful in quelling the hyperinflammatory response, and intravenous ascorbate has been used quite a bit in China. I'm in touch with the head of the ICU at the university hospital in Wuhan who established the first randomized placebo-controlled trial of IV vitamin C. But his numbers weren't big enough. They ended up with about 20 in each arm. And now they don't have enough cases to expand that trial. So I've been working with him to connect him to other ICUs where they would use his protocol in intensive care hospitalized patients, but he saw clear evidence that IV vitamin C improved organ function, but his sample wasn't large enough to have a statistically significant difference in mortality.

And that's just one thing. I've recommended IV vitamin C to a number of colleagues for themselves and for their patients who, you know, had an illness that was consistent with COVID-19. They were unable to get documented, but in every case it's made them feel a lot better. I've also recommended—and this is something I've used for over a decade with many types of viral infections—which is a 3-day pulse of high-dose vitamin D and high-dose vitamin A, about 50,000 units of each per day for 3 days, along with vitamin C to bowel tolerance, meaning you take it, you know, maybe start with 500 milligrams every 2 hours and gradually increase until there's a mild laxative effect, but you're not having diarrhea, because that's the limiting factor with oral vitamin C is the laxative effect that it has beyond a certain point. But in every case with COVID-19 consistent symptoms, people have gotten significantly better.

You know, the major contraindication to high-dose vitamin A is that there must be zero chance of pregnancy in a woman because there's a high—that dose, even for a short time, would—could be teratogenic in an early pregnancy. So zero chance of pregnancy. And for the high-dose vitamin D, the contraindications to that are people with any lymphoid malignancy. That would include lymphomas, lymphocytic leukemias, possibly myeloma. Not all of these are problematic, but in many cases the malignant tissue will auto-convert the 25-hydroxy vitamin D to its active form, the 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D. And if that goes to high levels, you get high blood calcium you can calcify the kidneys, all sorts of bad things happen. And the other people at risk for that are people with chronic highly inflammatory illnesses in which the inflammation is not controlled. So if they're running, you know, C-reactive proteins in the teens to 20s to hundreds, those people would also have a relative contraindication to the 3-day pulse of vitamin D.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And in terms of—you've mentioned vitamin C, vitamin A, vitamin D, and zinc. Are there certain—like, is there a certain type of zinc that's better than—I mean, there's, you know, different types of, you know, like magnesium salts.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Yes, the most well-tolerated and most bioavailable zinc that I know of, it can be hard to get a hold of, is made by a company called MegaFood. It's zinc that's been incorporated into yeast, so it's a food-based zinc and it's easier on the stomach. But aside from that, zinc sulfate is poorly absorbed. All of the other salts of zinc—citrate, picolinic, gluconate—they're all absorbed about the same amount, and they need to be taken with a you know, in the middle of a significant size meal and spread out over the day to get that much in. But if you can get MegaFood zinc, there's 7.5 milligrams per tablet. So, you know, if you use 10 tablets twice a day, that's 150 milligrams of zinc. And in that form, that's probably more elemental zinc that will get into your blood than you would from the various zinc salts.

The other class of nutrients that are very important in stabilizing the inflammatory effect of the virus on the immune system are the flavonoids. And curcumin from the turmeric root was shown during the Ebola epidemic outbreak to reduce and suppress cytokine storm. There was a problem there. An herb called bergamot, which is a French one that also reduces blood lipids, has anti-inflammatory properties. Many flavonoids, those that have been highlighted are luteolin and resveratrol, but there are many. I listed them in a review paper that I wrote with some German colleagues, which is—I posted that to our group, which is what stimulated you to invite me to this.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I read that paper and I thought, and I said, I need to get you on this podcast.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Let's see, I have that list. Yes, so particularly effective, there's an entity called the NLRP3 inflammasome, which is sort of a coordinated cell signaling network within activated macrophages and T helper type 1 lymphocytes, and that causes production of inflammatory cytokines. So flavonoids that have been documented to interfere with activation of this NLRP3 inflammasome and modulate inflammatory responses include luteolin, which I mentioned, myricetin, apigenin, and I'll go into some food sources of these in a little bit, quercetin, kaempferol, and baicalein and vulganoside, which are flavonoids that are from Scutellaria baicalensis, the Chinese skullcap. Sometimes called Siberian skullcap, Scutellaria baicalensis. Its root is very, very flavonoid-rich, and you often find that in immune-supporting nutritional supplements. And resveratrol in particular was shown in vitro to significantly inhibit the MERS-CoV in the 2007-2008 outbreak in the Middle East with another coronavirus that caused this severe acute respiratory syndrome. Let me go to some of the foods that are—

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, if you could give us some of the foods that we should be including in our diet in order to get some of these things in, that would be very helpful.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: So apigenin is quite rich in celery and parsley. Kaempferol is rich in spinach, cabbage, and dill. Quercetin, good sources of that are dill, fennel leaf, onion, oregano, and chili pepper. And luteolin is rich in olives and star fruit. Naringenin is in citrus fruit. And oleuropein is another important one, which is in olives.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Of course, for some people, they're probably listening to that and thinking, wow, I can't get to the grocery store, right? It's not safe for me to go to the grocery store. Olives are something that they might have in their cabinet that they didn't realize had some kind of health benefits. Is it—do you know, is it a particular kind of olive that is particularly beneficial?

Dwight McKee, M.D.: I've not seen anything differentiate between olives. I think they're pretty similar in their content of flavonoids. And, you know, hesperidin is one of the citrus bioflavonoids which is of particular note because it's been shown to bind to the spike protein. Remember I was talking about that's the one that binds to the ACE2 receptor for the virus to infect the cell and go inside and start making copies of itself. So hesperidin binds to the spike protein and interferes with the refolding and actually inhibits the viral infection process. It's often included with—in fact, look for vitamin C supplements that contain hesperidin because that's one of the flavonoids often included. And all the citrus fruits are good sources of it.

Oil of oregano has a compound called carvacrol, which has antiviral effects. It hasn't been specifically tested in any of the SARS viruses, but quercetin, which I mentioned, and that's of course a key supplement for our mast cell activation syndrome population, right?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: The main issue with quercetin is its poor bioavailability. It's poorly absorbed from the gut, but it is much better absorbed sublingually. So if you can find any quercetin that you can just, you know, put in your mouth and suck on, you'll get more of it that way. There's also a liposomal form of it that is in some supplements that has about a 20-fold increase. But it was shown to inhibit the SARS-CoV-1 virus, the original SARS virus, and it has shown antiviral effects in animal models with influenza.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So I have a question about the quercetin. I'm wondering, could people take the capsules and open them and, you know, put the powder underneath their tongue? Would that—

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Absolutely, absolutely. It's not going to taste very good, but that'll work. And, you know, you might be able to mix it with some monk fruit or something, or cinnamon powders, you know, experiment with recipes that—but you will absorb it considerably better sublingually than you do orally.

Another one I wanted to mention, important trace mineral, is selenium. And fortunately, I mean, you don't even need to go out and buy selenium supplements if you can get Brazil nuts. So, you know, 3 or 4 Brazil nuts will give you a highly effective amount of selenium. One Brazil nut contains about 100 micrograms of selenium on average. So I would say, you know, if for prevention, eat 2 a day, and if you've got viral symptoms, you know, maybe eat 10 a day for a while.

You know, one of the interesting things is that an early symptom in many people with COVID-19 is loss of smell and taste. And people have been speculating about, well, does the virus replicate in the nerve endings in the nose? But an equally viable speculation to that is that the immune response to the virus may be very, very highly zinc requiring. This being the reason that zinc is so synergistic with, you know, antiviral medications in high doses. And so if the immune system just takes all your zinc, we know that a zinc deficiency causes loss of sense of smell and taste. So if people have borderline zinc reserves, they get exposed to the virus, their immune system starts working on it, they may become, you know, lose their sense of smell. And what I haven't heard anyone try is supplementing such an individual with high-dose zinc and see if it comes back in a week.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Interesting. So in terms of, you know, we know with zinc we need to be a little bit careful, especially with long-term supplementation because it can diminish copper levels, right?

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Yeah. If you were to take 100, even 100 milligrams of zinc a day long-term, you would develop a copper deficiency and that can cause all kinds of bad things, but a high dose for a short time, just like the high dose for a short time of vitamin D and vitamin A, is well tolerated if the other part of that is you don't take any supplemental A or D after that 3-day pulse for a month.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: For months? Okay.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Yeah, that's an important thing to add in there. The amounts that are present in a multivitamin, like typically 400 units of vitamin D and maybe 2,500 units of vitamin A, those are okay, but you would not want to be taking 5,000 units of zinc or 10,000 units of vitamin A after having done that 3-day high-dose pulse for a month.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. And that's true for zinc, D, and A if you've done one of those high-dose pulse for 3 days for the D and A?

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Yes, exactly.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. Okay. That's really good. That's really good to know. In terms of zinc dosing that people can do for the purpose of prevention, is there a dose of zinc that works in a large number of people that they can use?

Dwight McKee, M.D.: I would say that people who are socially distancing, haven't been sick, want to be in their best immunologic shape possible if and when they encounter the virus, that daily intake of between 15 and 30 milligrams of elemental zinc. You know, it may say 50 milligrams of zinc gluconate, but you have to look on the label for how much elemental zinc that is. So I'm talking in terms of elemental zinc in the 20 to 30 milligram range. Higher if you've not taken zinc supplements, lower if you've been supplementing zinc at a typical supplement level of 7.5 milligrams or 10 milligrams a day, something like that. Long term, you don't need as much. But if the diet, unless you're eating lots of oysters, is just not very rich in zinc, the soil has been very depleted of zinc along with many other things.

And another compound that has both immunomodulatory and antioxidant properties is melatonin.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Ah, yes, tell us about that.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: I think it's a good idea for people who are waiting this out to, you know, take 1 to 3 milligrams of melatonin at bedtime. One of the hypotheses about why children do so much better with this infection than adults is that children have much higher melatonin levels. Sure. Of course, that is in the realm of speculation, and there are many, you know, there are many other aspects between children and adults, but children tend to get very mild symptoms with infection of this virus. If you get infected, you know, in my integrative cancer protocols for many years, I was recommending Allergy Research Group's melatonin, which is 20 milligrams in a little capsule. And that was based on a lot of clinical trials done in Italy where they used 20 milligrams. Now, that's the dose that they used. And in every trial, the melatonin group had better outcomes than the non-melatonin group. So we know that it's safe to take that much. Some people, you know, are really kind of hungover the next day, but the best thing you can do if you get sick with COVID-19 is sleep, right, and nourish yourself properly. You know, that's not—we need to be exercising and managing stress when we're well, but if you get sick, you need to sleep as much as possible. And so I would go to a 20-milligram melatonin with viral symptoms consistent with or documented to be COVID-19.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, that's that's fantastic. And would you recommend that that be sustained release or immediate release, or does it matter?

Dwight McKee, M.D.: I, with that kind of dose, I don't think it needs to be sustained release. With low doses, sustained release is much more effective in mimicking the natural pineal secretion of melatonin, which many older people just don't do well with. If your pineal gland is calcified on x-ray, which about 50% of people over 50 or so are, it is probably not secreting melatonin properly. And this is one of the reasons that so many older people have trouble sleeping. So I would say for prevention, 1 to 3 milligrams time-release. During infection, I would bump that up to in the range of 20 milligrams. If you have 3-milligram capsules, you could just take you know, 7 of them.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Some people have used as high as 30 milligrams. It's quite safe.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: And if it makes you groggy in the morning, stay in bed. Right.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, sure, absolutely. And I want to circle back to one of the supplements that you had mentioned earlier because I know, again, you and I dealing a lot with the hypermobile population and the mast cell activation and things like that, vitamin C is something that I recommend all the time. And we know that that's also important for connective tissue, right? And so is there one form of that over another that you would recommend? Of course, it's available liposomal and as a powder and as a capsule or as a tablet. Is there one form of that? You had mentioned a couple of potential additives, but is there—anything that you would—

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Yeah, I would look for one that contains citrus bioflavonoids because they're synergistic. And, you know, when you're taking large amounts, the salts of ascorbic acid—sodium ascorbate, magnesium ascorbate, calcium ascorbate—those are going to be better tolerated than the ascorbic acid in terms of the gut response. So if you're going to take vitamin C to bowel tolerance, you probably want to take one that contains the—that's also called buffered vitamin C. It means they're using the mineral salts of the ascorbic acid.

There's another supplement I want to mention, N-acetylcysteine.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Ah, yes.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Very important in health, especially during infection. It is, you know, it provides the rate-limiting step to glutathione synthesis, glutathione being the 3-amino acid peptide that is our body's most important intracellular antioxidant. But N-acetylcysteine also really helps to modify the mucus in the lung to make it easier to clear secretions, and it's been used in hospitals for many, many decades for this purpose. So I would say 600 milligrams for prevention and 600 milligrams 3 times a day during viral symptoms, or, you know, if you have any degree of cough.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, excellent. And what about taking glutathione itself? Is that something that's worthwhile or you recommend the N-acetylcysteine and skip taking it?

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Well, there's a lot of—there's not a lot of good research on supplemental glutathione. Certainly IV, it works. There are liposomal forms of it that maybe work, but we just don't have really good data on it. We know that if you supplement with N-acetylcysteine, your body will have an easier time making the glutathione that it needs. And if your diet and your supplementation, which I view as part of diet, is rich in antioxidants—and every compound we've mentioned here is also a potent antioxidant—sure, then it's easier for the body to recycle the glutathione into its active form.

And another important supplement to mention in terms of both preventing the virus, reducing susceptibility, and reducing the risk of cytokine storm if you get it, is palmitoyl ethanolamide, often abbreviated PEA.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: One of my favorite things.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Yeah, so PEA for prevention, I'd say, you know, 300 milligrams twice a day. During viral symptoms, 600 milligrams 3 times a day. It is sort of an endocannabinoid. It was originally thought to be an endocannabinoid and it's only 2 carbons shorter than anandamide, which is, you know, one of the 2 primary endocannabinoids. And the endocannabinoid system interacts in so many ways with the immune system and many other systems. But PEA, there's pretty good data on it preventing or reducing the risk of colds and flu, and some of those colds are coronaviruses. And also very good for stabilizing the inflammatory response to reduce the risk of a cytokine storm.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's great to know. And in terms of options for that, I know that there is a liposomal form that I have—actually, I take it and I've recommended it to quite a few patients. Is that something that you think is beneficial? I know we've talked about liposomal forms of some other things.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: I do. And for the liposomal form, I'd say 200 milligrams is worth 600 milligrams of the non-liposomal.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. 200 milligrams of the liposomal equals 600 milligrams of the non-liposomal. Okay. Excellent.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: There are some fairly good data on that. And elderberry is a long-time used antiviral herb. Recently there's been a lot of fear about it because there was, you know, there were some in vitro studies done in the early 2000s that showed that in tissue culture with macrophages and T cells, it stimulated inflammatory cytokines, and, you know, to about 4 to 6 fold. And people have looked at that and said, oh, you shouldn't take elderberry because it could cause cytokine storm. Well, a cytokine storm is—you're talking about 3,000-fold increase in these things, which elderberry increased in a tissue culture experiment by up to 6-fold. I don't know a single herbalist who feels that there is any risk of elderberry contributing to cytokine storm, and any form of elderberry you find is derived from cooked elderberries because raw elderberries are toxic. So the black fruit are cooked and then kind of a syrup is derived from that. But I would recommend, you know, 500 milligrams of a good elderberry extract daily. And if you can get it with the leaf and flower extract, those are the compounds in the berry that are synergistic with the compounds in the leaf and flower. So that's the really preferred elderberry supplement, but the berry itself is quite helpful.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, great. And in terms of these things that we've mentioned, there are some people that are going to have the ability to get lots of these things, and there's other people that are going to say, wow, I can only afford to buy one supplement or incorporate one food that I'm not already doing. Is there one that's kind of most important out of all the ones that you've mentioned so far?

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Well, green tea is another one that I didn't mention, which is easy for people to do. Drink a lot of green tea. The flavonoids in green tea also potently reduce inflammation. Yeah, I would say all of the foods that I mentioned, and, you know, the sort of functional medicine concept of eating the rainbow of colored foods—red, orange, yellow, green, and blue foods—is a good one in general to follow because Nature's kind of marking those brightly colored fruits and vegetables as being a source of especially important compounds, and in this case they are flavonoids such as anthocyanins and carotenoids and so forth. So a colorful diet. Sure. You know, if you're at home eating beans and rice, you'll survive, but it doesn't have the things in it that are going to help you if you encounter this virus.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure. And my theory, you and I didn't even discuss this before we started, but my theory is very similar to yours that there are people that are apparently healthy but have nutritional deficiencies and therefore not as able to cope with the virus as well. And additionally, as an anesthesiologist, I would have people, you know, that I'd be pre-oping for surgery and the surgeon would tell me they're healthy, they have no medical problems, and you go to see them and it's just that they've never been to the doctor. So there's also potentially some of that where, you know, people just have not, you know, they might not have actually had things appropriately evaluated or like you're saying with the bendy population.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: It's analogous to the 4 countries that have had no cases of COVID-19 because they don't have a single test. Right, right, right, absolutely.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And in terms of—I really appreciate you mentioning the NAC and in terms of the respiratory effects for that. Anything else specifically that you would mention for respiratory systems that you think is beneficial?

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Well, I think we've covered most of them. If someone is quite quite sick and thinking that they might need hospitalization and they've already done the high-dose vitamin A, C, D, or the 3 days of A and D, and they're continuing with bowel tolerance vitamin C and taking many of the things that we've mentioned. If they can get a hold of a 5-day course of Plaquenil and combine that with high-dose zinc, that would be my go-to stay out of the hospital regimen.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, sure.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: With or without a Z-Pak, but with a Z-Pak, it introduces—they need to know their QT interval. Sure. Because if it's prolonged, both of those drugs prolong it, and you take them together, it prolongs it a lot. And if it's already prolonged, they'd run the risk of very dangerous ventricular arrhythmias.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That makes sense. And if you can stay out of the hospital nowadays, that would be a good idea. If you're in quite severe distress, then you need to call 911 or potentially go into the emergency room or the hospital. But definitely, just a disclaimer, be sure to call you know, first, because that's what they're, you know, wanting people to do nowadays. But, right, okay, okay, that's, that's all great information. Now getting back to our specific—

Dwight McKee, M.D.: And, and if also one of those stay out of the hospital therapies, if you can access it somehow, would be IV vitamin C in the range of 20 grams.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Every day or every other day. I've seen that really turn people around from what looked like they were going to end up in the hospital to not.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Interesting, interesting. And would you, before you do that, would you want them to have a G6PD—

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Yes.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh boy, phosphate test.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Okay. Yeah. Everyone should have a G6PD, which is an easy test to get, but maybe not in these times.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right. Right, so you want to—

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Quest both carry it.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: I'm not sure what the turnaround time is on G6PD.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, okay. Some people already know.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: It depends on the hospital. Some of them do it in-house.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, sure.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Anybody who's ever had high-dose IV vitamin C, whether they were tested or not, it doesn't need to be tested because if they did have G6PD deficiency, they would have hemolyzed and had serious renal pain and renal insufficiency and so forth.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, sure. Okay, okay. Yeah, that's helpful to know. And for people who are not aware of that, you don't necessarily need to worry about this. This is for your doctor who may be potentially administering that, but you might, you know, you could mention that you've heard about this and it's something that you're interested in, but you know, there's a test that potentially should be done beforehand. And it's also helpful to mention if you have had high-dose vitamin C intravenously in the past. So that's really—

Dwight McKee, M.D.: They don't need to be tested if they've had more than 10 grams IV in the past.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: OK. OK, very good. And getting back to our bendy population that has—they might have EDS or another hypermobility disorder. They may or may not have dysautonomia or dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system. And/or mast cell activation syndrome, so they have abnormal mast cell granulation and that kind of thing, are there any certain precautions that they should take? Should they be changing the medication regimen that they're on? Especially, I guess I'm specifically asking about the people with mast cell activation syndrome.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Well, I think it would be very important for them to stay on all of their mast cell medications and be sure that they, you know, that they take them with them if they go to the hospital, because the hospital may or may not take them seriously about, oh, I need antihistamines, and, and, you know, they may not have Cromolyn. So they should have, you know, they should have a kind of a 2-week supply of their—all their mast cell medications and supplements ready to go in case they do need to go to the hospital. And the patient should take it with them because their family may not be allowed to visit them if they test positive. They get put in isolation.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: And if they have—if they take that with them, then they can take them whenever the nurse is not in the room, which is probably a lot of the time these days. I would have no compunctions about telling them to just take their mast cell medications off the record, or they could tell the doctor, you know, hey, I have mast cell activation syndrome and I take these things, I brought them with me, they don't interact with anything. Because if they—if, you know, a mast cell patient under good control may actually have some advantages over a non-mast cell patient, or certainly an undiagnosed and untreated mast cell patient. And that's what it may well be. Some of these young people who have died of cytokine storm may have been undiagnosed mast cell patients. Larry Afrin has noted that the incidence of cytokine storm is about 15%, and the incidence of mast cell activation syndrome in the population is about 15%, and the vast majority of those are undiagnosed and untreated.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure. And with that 15%, is that 15% of people who have serious illness with this or 15% of cases.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: It's just 15% of documented cases. So it's, you know, it's probably lower because we're very, very far away from knowing the denominator in this, in this pandemic, especially in this country.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, sure. And, and, and I would add too, for the people that are on medications for mast cell activation syndrome, some of their medications are compounded because they can't have the quote-unquote inactive ingredients or excipients. And so if they go to the hospital and they just get, you know, they might say, oh, I'm already taking, you know, some antihistamine, but maybe they can't tolerate it.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Right, and they get it from the hospital pharmacy and react to it.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Exactly.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: So that's why I'm saying they should have a 2-week pack of their stuff put aside, ready to go with them to the hospital if they if that need would ever arise.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, sure. That's, I think that's very, very, very good advice. Okay, and there's a couple of other things that I wanted to ask about that were, have been out there in the media, and I'm just, you know, and/or I've seen some articles about this, and I imagine other people have as well. And with your expertise, it would be very interesting to hear what you think about blood types. The data about blood type.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Yeah, vitamin A—type A seems to do less well, O seems to do better. This is probably related to lectins in ways that we don't understand because lectins are what are the determinants of the blood group antigens. And there also are lectins that are antiviral. For instance, the nettle root, Urtica dioica, which is commonly used in prostate supplements. It contains a lectin which is very potent in vitro and in animal models against SARS-CoV-2. And so, you know, another thing people might consider for their zinc supply would be, you know, a prostate support supplement that has the Urtica dioica root extract in it as well as the zinc. So there's probably some interaction between the lectins of the blood group with either the virus or with the immune response to the virus that is significant, and the lectins that generate blood type A may interfere somehow in that response where O doesn't have them. And I don't remember whether AB, the AB type, where it fell on the curve. I know A was worse and O was better.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's all I remember seeing too. Yeah, I don't remember saying anything about AB. Yeah.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Yeah, and I don't think the Rh factor has been found to make any difference, but you know, there's nothing we can do about our blood type.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right, right.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: But there's a lot we can do about our nutritional preparedness for this and lead a health-enhancing lifestyle right now when people don't have to work. You know, people don't have to stay inside, they just have to stay out of public places. So I encourage people to go out and walk. We have a 5-acre property in Northern California with a lot of—part of it is forested and we're surrounded by forests. And I was out in the world for 3 weeks in Florida during the time it was on its way to being a hotspot. And so when I got home, I quarantined myself in the house trailer that we have set up for house guests, and my wife brings me food and takes away my trash. And, you know, during the day I just go outside and wander around in nature. So it's a good time to be exercising, it's a good time to be meditating or doing any kind of stress management, and it's not a great time to have the news on 24/7 because—right. The news is—the news generates stress. I mean, it's good to check in every now and then, you know, and just see where it is. But in terms of what you might consume from the TV, my suggestion, or the web, my suggestion are things that make you laugh, because we know that laughter is particularly powerful in moving the lymphatic system and in supporting the immune system and negating the effects of stress. So I'd say watch stuff that makes you laugh and spend time in nature, eat well, start a garden, even if it's little pots on your your balcony of your apartment and, you know, get the best food that you can.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I love that you particularly used the word consume when you were referring to the news, because I feel like we should view it that way, that it's like putting something in our bodies that really is quite toxic. And like you said, you can't unsee it, you can't unhear it. No, you can't, you can't. And the media, the media is all about just trying to sell you something, and it's no longer about objective information. And obviously there's lots of—

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Yeah, they're looking for what's sensational.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's correct.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: That's what puts eyes on their channel.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: But everything that's sensational is stressful.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right, right, absolutely. So I really like that because in addition to pointing out things that we should be doing, I did want to make sure to cover things that we should not be doing. So watching the news, I mean, more than kind of maybe checking the web briefly just to see, hey, is there something else that I should be doing? But otherwise, a very, very limited amount of that. Are there other things that people should avoid doing?

Dwight McKee, M.D.: I mean, I would avoid over-exercising.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: OK.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: This is not the time to be training for a marathon or a triathlon because those—there's a bell-shaped curve with exercise and the immune response. So stay in that sweet spot, which is 1,500 to 2,500 kilocalories per week, and do things that you love doing. It might be puttering around your garden, or—but yeah, do things that make you happy, watch things that make you laugh, be outside as much as you can, and eat as well as you can. And supplement as well as you can.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: What about alcohol? Any thoughts about that?

Dwight McKee, M.D.: I would avoid alcohol right now.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, completely?

Dwight McKee, M.D.: You know, there's some data that in terms of heart health, a little bit of alcohol may be better than none, but in terms of the immune system, I don't think that regular consumption of alcohol is going to be good for that. Use, you know, buy Everclear and pour it on baby wipes and use that to wipe down everything you get from the store. That's the way we use alcohol.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, sure, right. Yeah, that's a, that's a good, good plan. I like that plan.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Yeah, because you can't buy, you know, isopropyl alcohol in the stores anymore, but most liquor stores you can get, you know, 160 to 180 proof alcohol, and you can't get sterilizing wipes, but you can get, you know, baby wipes and just kind of wring them out and then fill them with alcohol and let them soak that up.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That is a great tip. I love that. Okay, I'm adding that to my list of notes here. Okay, yeah, because you're right, there's—those are some of the things that you can't get in the storeroom, and, and all these tips are fabulous and great, but if we don't do the basic things too, like washing our hands and wiping down surfaces, and you know that, then the rest of this stuff is not going to, you know, really be very helpful. So, okay, wonderful. Is there anything else that I should have asked you? And can you also let people know where they can find out more information about you and the work that you're doing?

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Well, I kind of hide from the world.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's okay too. That's okay.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Yeah, my interest in mast cell activation syndrome was the realization that my son, who was exposed to toxic mold and developed chronic fatigue, has mast cell activation syndrome, which you know because I presented his case at our meeting where we met. Right. but I don't, you know, I, I do consulting for research. I formulate for a nutraceutical company. I consult with other doctors about integrative cancer care, but I don't have a website. And aside from doing interviews, I'm in the low-profile stage of my career.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's okay. That's okay. Well, I'm so grateful to you for, for doing this interview with me. This is this has been such great information, and there's been so many people who have been asking questions. What should I do? I have, like you said, either I suspect that I have mast cell activation syndrome or I do have it. I do have EDS, dysautonomia, any of those things. So this is just going to be so, so helpful. So I'm so grateful to you for taking the time to chat with me today.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Oh, you're more than welcome, Linda. My pleasure.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, great.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, you all have been listening to Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD. Today my guest has been Dr. Dwight McKee, board-certified physician in medical oncology, hematology, nutrition, and integrative and holistic medicine. And thank you so much again, Dr. McKee.

Dwight McKee, M.D.: Thank you, Linda. Take care.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, you too. Please go to bendybodies.org for links to all the episodes and to access the show notes. If you enjoyed this podcast, please share, leave a review, and consider rating us 5 stars. Don't forget to subscribe so you will be notified of all new episodes. Feedback is greatly appreciated and can be emailed to bendybodyspodcast@gmail.com. Go to hypermobilitymd.com to sign up for my newsletter. Thank you to Rhett Gill for production and sound editing, to Andrew Savino for composing our original music, and to Jennifer Arsenault for designing the Bendy Bodies website and cover artwork. This podcast is for informational purposes only and is not a substitute for medical advice. Please see your own medical team prior to making any changes to your healthcare. Thanks for tuning in, and we'll see you next time on Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD.
