---
num: 8
title: "8. Demystifying Genetics with Paldeep Atwal, M.D."
date: "2020-04-29"
duration: "56m"
description: "Your DNA holds many secrets.  Why do drugs work on some people and not on others?  Why are conditions expressed so differently in different family members?  How might hypermobility disorders, dysautonomia (like POTS) and Mast Cell Activation Syndrome (MCAS) be related and how does coronavirus fit into all of this?  \nListen in as top geneticist, Dr. Paldeep Atwal, shared his expertise on the following: \n\nHypermobility disorders - Why are Bendy people so different from each other yet can also share many common traits? \n\nEhlers-Danlos Syndromes - Why is it taking so long to find “the hEDS gene” \n\nEpigenetics - How much of a difference do our day to day choices make? \n\nGenetic and pharmacogenetic testing - Why do the testing if you cannot change the outcome?\n\nImportant note: The discussion about nutrition and intermittent fasting refers to the body of research with subjects from the general population. Therefore, this information is most applicable to those who are overweight or obese. You need quality nutrients for your body to perform properly! PLEASE do not make any changes to your diet (meaning foods you eat), without consulting with your own primary care physician or nutritionist. \nLearn more about Dr. Linda Bluestein, the Hypermobility MD at our website and be sure to follow us on social media: Websites: https://www.hypermobilitymd.com and www.BendyBodiesPodcast.comInstagram: @hypermobilitymd Twitter: @hypermobilityMD Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hypermobilityMD/ Pinterest: https://www.pinterest.com/hypermobilityMD/ LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/hypermobilitymd/ \nAnd follow guest co-host Jennifer at the links below: Website: www.jennifer-milner.com Instagram: @jennifer.milner Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/jennifermilnerbodiesinmotion/"
tags:
  - "EDS"
  - "POTS"
  - "MCAS"
  - "Nutrition"
  - "Diagnosis"
  - "Genetics"
  - "Hypermobility"
  - "Research"
audioUrl: "https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH5067299934.mp3?updated=1721669948"
videoUrl: "https://youtu.be/SR6j512O7jo"
snippets: []
guests:
  - "Paldeep Atwal, M.D"
guestImages:
  - "Guests/Paldeep_Atwal.jpg"
---
Dr. Linda Bluestein: Welcome to Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD. This is your host, Dr. Linda Bluestein, here with Dr. Paldeep Atwal, board-certified clinical and medical biochemical geneticist and director of Atwal Clinic for Genomic and Personalized Medicine. He completed his genetics fellowship at Stanford University and subspecialty biochemical genetics fellowship at Baylor College of Medicine. Before serving as medical director for the Individualized Medicine Clinic at Mayo Clinic in Florida. He has a longstanding interest in rare and undiagnosed disease, including the use of multiple concurrent genomics platforms to provide a diagnosis to patients. He conducts translational research with the goal of discovering new genetic syndromes and designing new therapies for genetic disease. Through his work, he co-led the discovery of biparental mitochondrial inheritance in humans discovered two new genetic connective tissue syndromes, co-developed an untargeted metabolic screening test for inborn errors of metabolism, and published extensively on human genetics with over 70 peer-reviewed publications to date. In this episode of Bendy Bodies, Dr. Atwal and I chatted about the genetic influencers of joint mobility and possible explanations for why all bendy people are not alike. Other topics covered include how epigenetics are more like an accelerator pedal than a light switch, and how dietary modifications may influence DNA repair, especially amongst those with obesity, diabetes, and/or cardiovascular disease. Thank you so much for joining me today on Bendy Bodies.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Yeah, thanks for having me. I appreciate taking the time to speak.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: It is so great to have you on the show. Let's start out by talking about the incidence of hypermobility disorders. And I would like to know, compared to the general population, dancers and other flexibility artists like gymnasts, they're known to have a higher incidence of hypermobility and hypermobility disorders. Which is the umbrella term that we use to describe people with symptoms related to joint hypermobility. Can you start out by telling us about the different genetic and non-genetic reasons why someone might be bendy, which is the term we use to describe people who have a greater than average range of motion?

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Yeah, yeah, happy to. So I think, yeah, bendy. Yeah, so we can, we can talk about a couple of different things there. So the first thing is non-genetics, just in general, if you think about a population of people, there's variation in that population. So there's an average level of flexibility or bendiness, right? And, and that tends to follow what we call this bell-shaped curve or normal distribution. So some, most people will be in the middle of that. So there's some people that will be really inflexible, so they'll be really stiff. And there were some people that are really flexible, And that's, that's just a normal variation in a population. Now, there are things that influence that even in those populations. For example, there's differences between males and females. So on average, males tend to be less flexible than females, on average. So some males that are more flexible than females, of course. And there's reasons for that as well, things like testosterone and underlying hormonal differences. That's a higher, you know, that's a more kind of population higher level. And then we get into the genetics of things.

So if you think about two types of genetics, there's single gene genetics or Mendelian after Gregor Mendel, and then there's complex genetics that really talk about interactions between multiple different genes together that may influence a certain trait. Now, single gene is one that we are most familiar with and work with the most when it comes to the practice of clinical genetics and medicine. And we know that there are genes that influence that. For example, the Ehlers-Danlos genes, Marfan, and other what we call heritable disorders of connective tissue. These are genes that work on— that are involved in the structural proteins in the connective tissue, the collagens, the fibrillins, et cetera. And changes in them can influence how tightly those collagens, et cetera, are bound together. And that can translate to joint laxity. The other part of that is there might be small changes in a number of genes, let's say 50 genes, 100 genes, And if they're— all of those genes are changed in a certain way, now we're talking about complex genetics, um, or complex traits, uh, then you get, uh, that influence a certain trait, whether in this case flexibility. So let's say there's 100 genes that, for example, there's— let's say there's 100 genes that are involved in how flexible you are. If 90 of those 100 all have a certain change in one way, that'll make you more flexible, whereas if they have it another way, it might make you less flexible. And each gene has a tiny amount of influence, but on aggregate, it's what— it's how they're skewed, if that makes sense. And so that's one of the theories behind hypermobility, essentially, is perhaps it's not a single gene, perhaps it's a complex trait that has multiple genes involved. So anyway, I'll stop there. That's a lot. Happy to talk more about those things.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That really is a very helpful explanation though, because I think that when I spoke to you before for the Hypermobility Happy Hour podcast and you were explaining about phenotypic versus genotypic expression, and that really helped me to understand why there's so many people that may look like they have a variant of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, which we know is the more common heritable disorder of connective tissue, right? But they maybe don't because of what you're explaining now in terms of this complex genetics, that maybe it's not a single gene but a whole host of genes interacting together, if I'm understanding you correctly.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Yes, exactly, exactly. Yeah. And if you think about genetics. We have, in humans, we have around 20,000 genes. It's not a big step to suggest that those other genes interact with that gene that might be causing a particular condition in some way such that even if you see it in families all the time, we call it variable expression. In that if they all have— if there's a genetic condition that runs in the family, let's say siblings or parent and child, they might manifest the condition differently. So one may be more severe than the other, one might be less severe, etc. And the question then is, well, why is that the case if they both have the exact same genetic change in that gene? And it's other influencers of that, how it manifests. So other genes There's other mechanisms such as epigenetics, which I think we might talk about later. So it's not— everything's working with each other. It's like a big melting pot. And it's not— we like to think of it all separate, but it's much more interlinked and connected than some people like to think about, let's say.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, sure. And can also help us to understand why people that you see, people that I see, that clearly have some hypermobility disorder, so they have similarities, but yet they can look so different from each other, even within a family.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Exactly. Yeah.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Exactly. So let's talk about epigenetics, actually. Let's just jump right into that. Can you explain to us what epigenetics is, how that might influence genetic expression, and how people who are bendy can use, or people who aren't, but in general, just how can we use that to our advantage?

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Yeah, yeah. So let's talk about epigenetics. So epigenetics is, uh, one of the main mechanisms to control gene expression. So the concept of gene expression is the idea that you have genes like textbooks or recipes, and sometimes you'll, you'll be using them and sometimes you won't be. And also sometimes you will be using them a lot and sometimes you'll be using them just a little bit. And the way the body controls how much it's using them or if it's using them at all is through control mechanisms like epigenetics. So it's a way to control the expression or the functionality of a gene. People think of epigenetics like a light switch that it switches a gene off or switches a gene on, and that's it. There's like a binary, you know, function: off or on. And whereas in reality it's more complicated than that. It's more— it's better to think of it like an accelerator pedal, in that a gene can, you know, be cruising along at 30, or you can put it, uh, you know, you can go up to 50, or you can, you know, really put the foot down and have full, you know, maximal expression of that gene. And epigenetics is the way that that is controlled. Does that make sense?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, it does. That does make sense. I like the idea of rather than the light switch, the accelerator pedal, because we know that in terms of nutrition and exercise, and these are a couple of things that influence.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Exactly. And that was where I was just going to go into. So thanks for that. So then to answer your second part of your question, how do— how can we use epigenetics to our advantage or benefit people? So we know that there's a number of things that influence our gene expression. Exercise, you mentioned exercise. You mentioned nutrition. These are both ways that we can quite significantly influence our epigenetic expression. Epigenetic control mechanisms. So if we do, do the right things from a nutritional perspective and exercise and conditioning perspective, that influences the DNA expression in our body, which is an amazing thing to think about. And it's— people may not realize it has such a profound effect, but That's truly what's happening. That's why you see the changes in the weeks or months from making these kind of changes in nutrition or exercise. It's truly causing a change in your DNA expression, which is, I think, amazing.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That really is amazing. I think that a lot of people get very frustrated because they'll read the headlines of different studies and they'll say, oh, but People keep flip-flopping on nutrition and what we should be doing. But if you really think it, if you really look at the big picture, most of the messages have stayed very consistent over the years. Avoid sugar and white flour. And we want lots of polyphenols and plants in general are good. So I think that part of the difficulty, if I'm understanding this correctly, is that yes, nutrition matters greatly and affects our DNA, but it's just a hard thing to study. It's hard to conduct those studies and to really be able to demonstrate correlations because of the, you know, humans don't remember super well. Like I can't remember what I had to eat necessarily yesterday, much less for the past 5 years. And that can—

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Right. Right. And so let's talk about nutrition for a minute. There's, well, firstly, there's a lot of misinformation out there and that is unfortunate. And this, to your point, highly processed foods that all of the micronutrients and everything is pulled out, and it's, you know, the end result of a, you know, you know, a sugar load that tastes good very quickly and, but doesn't really fill you, doesn't actually provide you any nutritional value. And so the first thing to do is separate calorific value or calorific content and nutritional value or nutritional content. So When you look at food, you should look at the balance between nutritional use and calorific use. Now, in the past, when, you know, before industrialization, before— certainly well before refrigeration, there was a calorific deficit that humans experienced such that it was actually hard to find enough food, right? That 15 to 20% 1500 to 2000 calories a day was, was a challenge. Um, certainly in the US we have no such challenge at all, right? You can find that in one meal, no problem. Um, so, so, but we have a genetic programming that still craves highly calorific foods, right? Um, so we have to kind of overcome that a little bit. And really focus on the nutritional aspect of those foods rather than the calorific density. We really actually don't need calorific density in our food because we have so much food available. We should, we should actually even limit the calorific density and focus on nutritional density, and that actually fills us up more. We'll actually get more full with that. There's also a great study that's come out recently, and you may have been following this. I've certainly been following it. There were some literature and documentation of things like intermittent fasting and, you know, people look at all these different types of diets, the ketogenic diet and all of that. And now that to your point on people are able to track certain, um, people are able to track how they're eating, what they're eating, when they're eating, apps and other things that there's a bit more awareness. I think, um, there were some, there's always fad diets and some crazes that come and go. And the latest one is this ketogenic diet. And I think, and it's the, you know, I don't think, certainly don't think it's the answer, but I think that a lot of people have this beneficial effect with it in the short term because It's probably the first time they've been out of glycolysis in their lives that they can remember, in that they're using— they're not eating glucose or stored glucose in the form of glycogen as their primary source of fuel, and they're switching to fatty acid oxidation. Which is, if you think about it, the maximum time they— if someone wakes up, they have they have cereal or some other thing with lots of carbohydrate, then they have lunch a few hours later, then they get home and they might have a snack, then they have dinner, then they have a snack just before bed. They're never really out of a time where they're not getting a carbohydrate intake. And when they are, they've got plenty of glycogen to, to, um, to ensure they, uh, they're never really going to get out of glycolysis. So that's really the, that's really why people notice such an effect with it. But the, there's a great review article that, um, a couple of months ago came out in the New England Journal on intermittent fasting and its, uh, its role in, uh, health and aging. And it really looked at that switching between glycolysis and fatty acid oxidation as the true benefit in terms of expression of DNA repair type, our DNA protection type molecules, sirtuins, all of these types of things. It's a great paper. I would encourage everyone to read it even though it's very medical.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And I'm sure there's some people who are going to go, wow, I've tried the intermittent fasting, I've tried the ketogenic diet. I, and I, and I definitely have noticed some, some improvement, but there's going to be some words in there that they're going to say, oh, I don't know what what some of these things mean. In my view, what I'm thinking of is when I talk to my patients about, they say, "Oh, I have such a sweet tooth and I crave sugar," and stuff like that. It seems like once you switch to this way of eating where you're eliminating a lot of carbohydrates and you're focusing on, like you said, nutrient density and And also having periods of time that you're not eating, the intermittent fasting. If you're going 12 hours without eating or depending on the guidelines, 12, 14, whatever hours without eating, just drinking water and maybe having some green tea or something, but you're not consuming anything that's going to— nothing with calories, right? That, I think, it seems like that really helps to minimize—

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: It does.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, those cravings.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: It does. And one of the biggest things people need to do is be aware of how they're feeling and why they're feeling it. Often the first thing is they're actually requiring more water intake when they feel hunger. So seeing what a glass of water does for their hunger levels. And then the second thing is, it's interesting to note that, and I feel this as well, actually, as you're hungriest when you're eating, which is really interesting. So when you start eating is when you actually become the most hungry and you want to eat more the most, rather than when you've gone 5 hours without a meal, which doesn't make sense when you think about it, like, offensively, but it really is the case for many people.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That is very, very interesting. Huh, that is very interesting. And to me, when you really think about how pro-inflammatory sugar is and how many conditions that we have are so related to inflammation that to break that cycle of the sugar carbohydrate cravings is so important. It can make such a significant difference for people.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Absolutely. Yeah, absolutely. Agreed. Agreed. Yeah.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So can you tell us a little bit about why the prevalence of hypermobility disorders seem so much greater in females than males?

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Yeah, it's very interesting. And I think the way I think about that and the way I explain it is back to this population norms and the bell-shaped curves. So if you think about one of the prime manifestations of— well, let me just say that when you say that the prevalence of hypermobility, or let's talk about the prevalence of hypermobile EDS, or just EDS in general when it comes to the hypermobile type. The manifestation primarily is hypermobility, right? The first thing that people notice, or maybe don't notice it, but it's always there. If you think about those populations of males and the population of males and females, men on average are less flexible. So they're on average not as bendy as women, just the differences in hormones, primarily differences in testosterone level. Now, to compound that, and it's important to realize it is a compound effect, because of that difference in testosterone level, men on average have more lean muscle mass than women. So if you think about the second most common thing, pain, right? So you get loose joints because the muscles are having to work harder to support those loose joints, you get this manifestation of pain and fatigue. Now, if you're less flexible and you have more muscle mass to support those joints, you're going to manifest less, which is also some of the ways we treat it, right? We encourage people to increase their physical conditioning. So that for me is the reason that men seem to manifest less than women. It's purely a— well, it's not purely, but a big contributor certainly is this hormonal difference between men and women that causes less flexibility and more lean muscle mass.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure. And that would fit too with the onset of menstrual cycles in females being often a time where they start to have more problems. So when they're less than 10 or whatever, of course now since young ladies are starting to often have their periods at a younger age, but they are, especially when it comes to something like dance, they're bendy and it's actually seen as an advantage. And then they start to get their menstrual periods and they start to have— that's when they start to have pain. And I'm always surprised at the patients that, you know, started having quite a bit of pain at a relatively, you know, young age, but then if you ask them, well, when did you start your periods? And that often seems to correlate with that.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Right, yeah, it's a great point. You made a great point there, and that's it. The hormonal influence is definitely there in both, both ways.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure. So in terms of genetic testing for people with joint hypermobility, what types of genetic testing would— do you think is important to consider? And, you know, when would you say that's indicated?

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Yeah, so I think for someone who is presenting with a possible genetic, or genetic condition, or heritable disorder connected to. Most of the time genetic testing is appropriate in that it used to be very challenging, very expensive, very hard to do genetic testing. And nowadays to do a large gene panel or even a genome sequence, you know, an exome sequence, shortly probably genome sequence. It's not that challenging anymore. There's insurance coverage for these things. There's multiple labs that are competing with each other trying to drive down price, drive down difficulty in access, and get more patient-friendly reports. And more availability of counseling and interpretation services. So I think the option for anyone presenting with one of these should be there. Now whether it's a strong option or a strong recommendation depends on their symptoms. So if someone clearly has symptoms suggestive of a particular type or severe subtype like a vascular EDS, I think it should be strongly recommended they get the testing. If someone is, let's say, perhaps a bit later in life, has kind of self-selected against having one of the severe forms and hasn't had any issues, has all of the features consistent with perhaps hypermobile, it's less of a concern to do the testing. I'll tend to offer it to people as a reassurance to them if they'd like to do the testing. I believe— I strongly advocate people should have the option to test if they want. There's a personal utility to that. The clinical utility may not be as high as the other scenario, but certainly there is a clinical utility as well. Broader testing is the way— if you look at what's happening in medicine, it's broader testing, more awareness of the subtle differences, and the trend is only increasing in that direction.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And I actually had a patient that I just did whole exome sequencing— I had ordered whole exome sequencing on the other day, and I was so happy that the insurance company did approve it. And that the report came back in a very, you know, for a non-geneticist, a very user-friendly way. And so it was, and the patient was very, you know, felt very validated and everything. So I think it's such a helpful thing. And if I understand this correctly, it used to be even quite recently that we only had really in terms of like, if you wanted to use your insurance, a very limited panel that you could maybe even get approved. And it would often come back negative because, you know, you're having to target a very narrow focus, whereas now we're able to look at a much broader picture, in many cases, not always, but in many cases, look at a broader picture and get a lot more information. And so it's much more— the genetic testing that you could do now is much more useful than what you could do even 5 years ago. Am I understanding that correctly?

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Yes, yeah, absolutely, absolutely, yeah. And that's exactly the point I was trying to make, so thanks, thanks for, thanks for that.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, okay, good. And so when it comes to Ehlers-Danlos syndromes specifically, we know that multiple different types have, have been identified, and that we know genetic markers for, for all but the hypermobile type, which, which we also know is by far the most common type. How much progress has been made on finding the markers for hypermobile EDS? And can you just explain, you know, I know we've covered this a little bit, but, um, why this process is so challenging?

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Yeah, yeah. So, so I think in this sense, I think the progress is a binary function in that we find a gene and then there's progress, and until we define the gene, there's no progress. And so But there's more to that. So I'm not being fair. So let's start. What's being done? Well, there's lots of different groups that are getting cohorts of individuals together that have hypermobile EDS. They're doing genome sequencing and other methods to try and identify some commonality in their genetics that would be a marker or a gene that would be pending it. And lots of people have done that and it's not really worked. And so I'm not sure that's the— you know, I think that's very valuable data for a number of reasons, but I'm less convinced. Well, let me tell you what to me I think the possibilities are. Okay. Number one, it's not a type of genetic change that is readily testable by current sequencing methodologies. So I don't want to get too technical here, but currently virtually all testing is done on what is called a massively parallel short-read sequencing platform. And people call it next-generation sequencing, but I don't like that term because I don't think it's very accurate. It doesn't tell you what's actually happening. So it's— imagine the gene is broken up into thousands of tiny little 100 base pair, or 75 to 150 base pair strands. They're all sequenced, and they're all stuck back together again by a computer. And then that's how you figure out what the sequence is. Now, the problem with that is it's not good at testing for differences. Certain types of genetic changes, certain sizes of deletion in a gene, certain structural rearrangements, insertion deletions, complex rearrangements. So all the information might be there, but it's not in the normal place. It's actually not very good at detecting those types of changes. And the other newer sequencing technology is long read sequencing. Technologies that are better at that. And so I think employing some of those technologies when we're looking at these patients to try and find, is there some structural abnormality there? That's one. Number two, it's a post-genetic change. It's a post, you know, so it's not a DNA level change, it's an RNA a post-translational change, or it's an epigenetic modifier, right, as we talked about, that's primarily driving this. But that needs to— we need to look at different things for that— proteomics, metabolomics, and epigenetic methylation type things, the methylome. And the third thing is it's not a single gene that's causing it. To my earlier point about complex traits. There's multiple genes that are involved, and there's some sort of threshold-type effect that's causing it. And that's much harder to detect with current— at the current level of technology we're at. The idea is that there's— once you get a certain amount of changes, you would get this kind of threshold point or crossover point where you'd manifest the condition. So that's the idea behind this complex trait. There are— there is progress in that in terms of using things like polygenic risk scores to make determination of risk of things like coronary artery disease, diabetes, et cetera. So there is a lot of progress there, but that hasn't really been applied to things like rare genetic diseases, more common diseases that have a small genetic component. We do think it is genetic. It does clearly run in families. It clearly has overlap with other well-defined genetic conditions. So I do think it's genetic, but those are the reasons I think there's a gene has not been identified yet.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, it's much more complicated than, than what, what meets the eye. I mean, I think a lot of the information that has been presented to, to us, um, is, you know, if they don't meet these new super strict criteria for hypermobile EDS, then, then therefore it's HSD.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Yeah, yeah, I mean, I think we have to realize consensus expert opinion for what it is. And I don't— I think it's highly valuable, highly useful, and I think we should be using it. But I also want to make the point that consensus expert opinion is not a substitute for robust molecular science. So what I mean by that is once we find a gene for something, whether a consensus of experts thinks someone has the condition or not becomes secondary to whether they have a pathogenic variant in that gene that perhaps is an expansion of that phenotype or— it's still valuable, but there's a higher level of evidence now with the molecular findings.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That makes sense. Yeah, and I know I just threw out the HSD and some people might not know what that is. But so real quickly, would you— because there's several things that I want to make sure that we can cover yet. Are you willing to just maybe give a little bit more of an explanation about the consensus criteria for hypermobile EDS and when in 2017 when they introduced this category of hypermobility spectrum disorder, you know, is it possible for you to give just a few sentences on kind of the significance of that?

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Yeah, so there was a change from before, and in terms of the, the criteria, diagnostic criteria for hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, it's not part of, you know, part of this hypermobility spectrum disorders, and it's represents that kind of severe end of it. But to meet the criteria for the hypermobile EDS, there's a number of different criteria. Three major ones: generalized joint hypermobility, and then the second criterion is there's two or more of, of features such as soft, velvety skin, physiogenic papules, or recurrent abdominal hernia is just an example. Positive family history is a separate one, and also separate is musculoskeletal pain in 2 or more limbs daily for at least 3 months. And then the third major criterion is, you know, the absence of a clear other explanation like, you know, rheumatoid arthritis, um, or absence of a clear neuromuscular disorder that would cause these, these pains, or Marfan syndrome, or or absence of unusual skin fragility suggestive of another type of EDS. So more of, more of an exclusion criteria. Make sure you're not missing something else. So it's quite— the idea with, if you look at it, it's a one-page form. And for, to me, the idea is someone who doesn't have that much awareness of Ehlers-Danlos, it's useful for that person to help them feel comfortable in making a diagnosis. So it's intentionally kind of specific and restrictive, if that makes sense. But remember, we're talking about complex genetic multi-organ condition that's been condensed down to tick boxes on one page, right?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: There's— we just have to realize that's what, what, that's what's happening here. There's obviously going to be major limitations with something, with doing anything like that.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's a great explanation. And I also want to make sure to talk about, especially since this, you know, this podcast is very much focused for, you know, people who are bendy but, you know, might be doing things like dance and other, you know, athletic and artistic endeavors. And there was a really fascinating article published recently that The title was High Prevalence of Connective Tissue Gene Variants in Professional Ballet, looking at a group of dancers at the Houston Ballet. And I was curious if you could comment on that study and its potential significance for other bendy dancers.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Yeah, so I'm not that familiar with that study in particular, but I'm happy to to just talk about it in general. So studies like this, it looks at, uh, you know, it's, they're by design, they're useful in that they look at population and they analyze features of that population and make inferred conclusions based on differences in that general population. So they're very useful. So, and what they, this one, I, I I haven't read the study in detail, but I've gleaned over the abstract. So they looked at increased— they find an increased prevalence of variants in known connective tissue genes in this population over and above the general population. I think that is interesting in that there's— it suggests that there's some gene interaction or some sort of more complex interplay between these genes that is causing something, which fits with one of the things I said earlier on complex traits. So I think there's a lot more that needs to be done here. The one question I would have in this particular study as these, these are variants compared to the general population, but are they known to be disease-causing variants, or are they just rare variants, if that makes sense? Like uncommon genetic variants that aren't necessarily known to cause disease themselves, but are different to the, the normal genetic variant that's there. I think it is that, but which makes sense. It's more of a It suggests there's a gene interaction effect going on in these kind of gene clusters, that there are certain changes and collection of these genes cause something, perhaps hypermobility. So it really actually speaks to the point on gene-gene interactions causing hypermobility.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And in terms of other types of changes pharmacogenetic testing that can be done, like pharmacogenomic testing and other SNP testing, single nucleotide polymorphisms. We know that that's quite popular right now, shifting gears for a minute. What should people in general know about that type of testing?

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Yeah, so I think pharma— I'm a big advocate for pharmacogenetic testing. Let me just explain pharmacogenetic testing. Pharmacogenetics is the science of how genetic variations in your body influence how you metabolize drugs. That's the kind of one-liner. So it's surprising to some people or unsurprising to others that just as your genetics influences so many other things like your hair color, how tall you are, and eye color, all sorts of other things, when you take, when you take a medication will influence how you respond to that medication. And this science, this is not new science, it's decades old, but the clinical use and clinical application is also not so that new, but it's certainly newer than the knowledge of it. So nowadays what people do is you have a baseline profile of your pharmacogenetics Ideally before you need to be on any medication. If and when you need to be on a medication, you know whether number one, that medication is going to be right for you or going to work for you. Number two, the standard dose that is given to a 30-year-old bodybuilder or a, you know, 90-year-old lady that weighs 90 pounds or so, which is also an interesting side side topic. Is that the right dose for you, or is it— or do you need to have an increased dose or a decreased dose, right, based on genetics? And so a common example, Plavix or clopidogrel, taken— it's an anti-coagulant medication taken for heart attack and stroke. So millions of people are on Plavix. In the, in the US. There is an FDA black box warning label on the label of this drug that suggests that, that says that pharmacogenomic variants and a certain CYP enzyme in the liver influence how well you metabolize this drug such that it might not be effective for you and it's recommended you have, you know, that these variants are looked at. That's the FDA black box warning label. It's not, you know, a side note or anything. Vast majority of people on Plavix have never had their enzyme, it's the CYP2C19 enzyme, they've never had it checked. So they're on Plavix, hopefully it's working for them, but we know that up to a third of the patients have variants in that gene that it doesn't doesn't work for them. It makes that gene—

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wow.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: It doesn't work. So just imagine how many people that might be that are on Plavix that may not be metabolizing it the way they should be. It's kind of scary, actually.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's mind-boggling. So if I'm understanding you correctly, there's a drug that's being commonly used called Plavix that is being used on millions of people. There's a known pharmacogenetic variant that is prevalent in like a third of the population, so a very large percentage of people that we have the ability to—

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Multiple variants.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Multiple variants, excuse me. But we have the ability to test for that, but most people have not had that kind of testing, so they might be taking this drug for most of the recommendations following stent placement or whatever. That might be for a year or even longer. And it's a potent drug and then there are certain implications when it comes to if they need to have surgery or something else and taking them off of the drug. And so, wow, that is mind-blowing.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: And just to add to the point you made there, you talked about stents and obviously one of the biggest risks with putting a stent in is stent thrombosis. The studies have been done showing that people who have nonfunctional pharmacogenetic variants and the CYP2C19 variant are significantly increased risk of stent thrombosis if they're put on Plavix because Plavix doesn't have the antiplatelet effect that they're needing to prevent it. Studies are out there, they're done, but it's still not commonly tested. It's a real shame.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So are you saying if I, you I just want to make sure I'm hearing you correctly. Are you saying that if you have that genetic variant and then you get put on Plavix, your risk might actually increase as if you were not on Plavix of stent thrombosis?

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: No, your risk reduction of stent thrombosis being on Plavix is not true. Right.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. Right.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Okay. Yeah. You should be put on something else that causes that particular effect. That was the point. So the risk reduction of that drug that you're, you know, one for a second heart attack or two for stent thrombosis that you're hoping to get by taking that pill every morning, you're not getting it. That's right. That was the point I was making.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure. No, that makes sense. So really what it seems to me that pretty much any of us that could afford to have this testing done, and I know sometimes it is covered by insurance and sometimes it's not, but that type of testing, it seems like it would make sense for most of us to have that. Yeah, yeah, yeah.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: I think it should, you know, the way I think it will go, I don't know when, 5 years, 10 years from now, it will be a population level thing that is hopefully the norm where it's part of the prescribing decision-making. Well, let's prescribe this drug. Well, let's make sure it works for this. It's personalized medicine we're getting into, or precision medicine, right? So it's the right drug for the right patient at the right time. So is it the right drug? Does it match up with their pharmacogenetics, or does it need to be this other drug? And And so that's what hopefully where we get to, but things, things, you know, in healthcare, things tend to move fairly slowly.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, sure. And that's a perfect lead-in to the last topic that I wanted to cover where, where things are not moving so, so slowly. And that's with the coronavirus pandemic. And, you know, this has happened quite quickly, actually. And we know that there are a number of people who have had some of this single nucleotide polymorphism testing, other types of genetic testing. And I'm wondering if— we see these reports about it's mostly the elderly that are getting very, very ill and/or dying, but that sometimes we see young, healthy people that have become very ill. And I'm wondering if— is this possibly related to some kind of genetic variant that causes them to be at much higher risk of complications, especially in regards to cytokine storm? Is there some explanation there potentially?

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Certainly there. If you think about all of the cytokine storm, all of the immune system underlying all of that, there's a there's genetics that decides how your immune system functions. So to answer the question, is there a genetic influence that influences how your body responds to a viral illness? Absolutely. And we know that, we know that's there, and we know we actually can see it on a much simpler level if we look at even differences between men and women, and going back to that again, it's such an easy example. We know that because of the X chromosome differences in women, such that cell has either one X chromosome on or the other, so women are really a mosaic of two X chromosomes, that changes the immune system in that it's more diverse, which is a good thing to fight infection. So actually, in a neonatal intensive care unit, female infants actually do slight— on average do slightly better than male infants. And then one of the reasons that is thought is because they're more diverse, they're thus more adaptive immune system. It's a small— it's not a big difference, which is a very small difference. And secondly, we know that women on average tend to have more autoimmune diseases. So this, and this other way, right? So it's too much, it's too much different, right? So we can apply all of those things to this as well. So of course there's going to be differences. Someone who is ostensibly healthy and doesn't have an obvious problem, they might have some genetic modifier that, increases their risk. That's not something practically we can do anything about right now. We can only focus on the— I would tell people to focus on the things you can do, ensuring your health is the best it can be and your immune system is as strong as it can be. You did touch on that interesting paper on the cytokine storm, and that really seems to cause a rapid deterioration in status of individuals. I think looking at where it's happening in the lung, if you think about the purpose of, well, what, you know, a cytokine storm, it's a pro-inflammatory response to combat the pathogen in this case, right? The problem is it can get to the stage where it's almost like What's the difference between a sniper's bullet and a carpet bombing, right? So it's very precise. One is very precise and one just, okay, it gets rid of the thing you're trying to get rid of, but it unfortunately gets rid of everything else. So if this is happening in the lung, it's a massive cytokine storm. You're getting destruction of lung tissue and destruction of all the normal gas exchange that you're going to be needing. That can actually cause more problems than benefits. And in fact, you know, this is more your area than mine, I think. So I'll maybe defer to you on explaining some more of that.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, no, it's a fascinating area. And I know you and I are also involved in some groups that are very actively involved in discussions about what potential things could be used. And unfortunately, there's not as much science there as a lot of us would like, but there's enough information that certainly for myself, I know that I have made a lot of changes to my kind of the supplements that I've been taking to try to make my immune system as robust as possible. But the genetic component of that is also very interesting. Yeah. Okay.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Well, very good.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Is there anything else that you would like to add and can you let us know where people can find you?

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Oh, sure. Yeah. So I have a clinic that's based in Florida, North Florida, Jacksonville. Normally I see people in person as well as remotely, but right now I think it's virtually all remote. And so I'm able to do telemedicine consultations for genetic consultations for Ehlers-Danlos and other genetic conditions. Website is atwalclinic.com, A-T-W-A-L clinic dot com. There's an email address if people have inquiries on certain things. And otherwise, there's— we have a blog as well. Then we— I love education like this. So I think I've done one of these with you before, Linda, as well. So we hope I hope you invite me back as well. I love education. I love spreading the right information and making sure people are informed and able to make their own decisions and to help best manage their care going forward.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Fabulous. And can patients see you from a wide variety of states or do they have to be in the state of Florida? How does that work?

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: I have licensure in multiple states.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Obviously it's state licensure dependent. And you know, if there's one good thing that comes up with all of the— this horrible situation we're in with coronavirus, I think it's understanding the power of telemedicine and why we need a big change in how telemedicine is practiced in the US. I completely disagree with this idea that every state as able as should. You have to get licensure in every single state to, um, there needs to be a federal medical license, right? Or something, something that our federal telemedicine license or something like that that can help. But anyway, that I'm, I'm asking, and I realize I'm perhaps asking for too much. But yes, to answer your question, it's restrictive. It's restricted based on the state, uh, and I have, you know, I have licensure in multiple states. I don't want to say which states, because that is changing and that continues to change as I either ramp up or ramp down some of that. But yes, the best thing would be for them to just ask and we can clarify. Or they can— or we can usually find some way to make it work, whether in person or some other way.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: OK. Well, I could not agree with you more about the hopes that I have in terms of making some real changes because we, up until now, have been really asking the sickest patients to travel the most distance to see people that really could help them. So a lot can be done via telemedicine and, you know, you and I participate in some groups that do some collaboration and some, you know, consultations that can benefit patients, but It needs to be, I think, a lot broader so that we can help as many people as possible. Well, it was so fantastic speaking with you, and I am so grateful for you coming on Bendy Bodies today.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Grateful for having me, and like I said, happy to come on anytime.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wonderful. Wonderful. Well, you all have been listening to Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD. Today, our guest has been Dr. Paldeep Atwal, board-certified clinical and medical biochemical geneticist and director of the Atwal Clinic for Genomic and Personalized Medicine. Dr. Atwal, thank you so very much for taking the time to share your knowledge with us today.

Paldeep Atwal, M.D: Oh, my pleasure.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Please go to bendybodiespodcast.com for links to all the episodes and to access the show notes. If you enjoyed this podcast, please share, leave a review, and consider rating us 5 stars. Don't forget to subscribe so you will be notified of all new episodes. Feedback is greatly appreciated and can be emailed to bendybodyspodcast@gmail.com. Go to hypermobilitymd.com to sign up for my newsletter. Thank you to Rhett Gill for production and sound editing, to Andrew Savino for composing our original music, and to Jennifer Arsenault for designing the Bendy Bodies website and cover artwork. This podcast is for informational purposes only and is not a substitute for medical advice. Please see your own medical team prior to making any changes to your healthcare. Thanks for tuning in, and we'll catch you next time on Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD.
