---
num: 15
title: 15. Shaping a Healthy Career with Beckanne Sisk
date: '2020-08-11'
duration: 44m
description: "Hypermobility is often desired in dancers for the long, beautiful lines it affords. But hypermobility adds its own challenges to dancers seeking a long, healthy career on the stage.\_\nIn this episode, we chat with principal dancer from Ballet West and international guest star Beckanne Sisk about how she manages her hypermobility. Beckanne opens up about learning to rein in her hypermobility, discovering when to hold back and when to lean into it, as well as how her pre-professional teachers helped her learn control.\_\nShe talks about how she maintains her strength and flexibility, what her maintenance program looks like, and why she stresses the importance of mentally working correctly while approaching the work thoughtfully. Beckanne speaks frankly about her approach to stretching safely (hint: it’s not about stretching, it’s about strengthening!) and advice she’d like to share with younger hypermobile dancers (hint: stop stretching and start strengthening!)\_\nBeckanne explains why she’s grateful for her scoliosis and hypermobility, how they’ve challenged and shaped her as a dancer, and what she wants to share with the next generation of dancers.\_\nA must-listen for every dancer living with the blessings and challenges of hypermobility, this episode is one you won't want to miss!"
tags:
  - Hypermobility
  - Dance & Performing Arts
  - Exercise
  - Injury Prevention
  - Mental Health
audioUrl: >-
  https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH5426494925.mp3?updated=1721669928
videoUrl: 'https://youtu.be/CQstAOrqIiw'
snippets: []
guests:
  - Beckanne Sisk
guestImages: []
---
[00:24] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Welcome to Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD, your podcast to learn all about the benefits and challenges of being bendy. This is co-host Jennifer Milner here today with Dr. Linda Bluestein. Before we introduce our incredibly special guest, a couple of quick reminders. Please subscribe and leave a review. This really helps get the word out because this podcast is for you. So today we have the great pleasure of speaking with Beckanne Sisk. Beckanne began her ballet training with Longview Ballet Theatre at the age of 5. At 13, she moved to Philadelphia to attend the Rock School for Dance Education on scholarship for 4 years. While there, Miss Sisk won the Jerome Robbins Award in 2007 and competed at the Youth America Grand Prix from 2007 to 2010, placing 1st and 3rd. She also won the bronze medal in the Beijing International Ballet Competition in June 2012 and was chosen for the 2012 Princess Grace Dance Fellowship Award. Adam Sklute invited her to join Ballet West II in 2010 at age 17. And after one year in Ballet West II, she joined the main company as a new artist in 2011 and then was promoted to principal in 2015. She's performed the female principal roles in Anna-Marie Holmes' Don Quixote, Adam Sklute's adaptations of Giselle, The Sleeping Beauty, and Swan Lake, and John Cranko's Romeo and Juliet and Onegin, which was recognized by Pointe Magazine as one of the standout performances of 2019. Original principal roles have been created on her by many renowned contemporary choreographers, and she's a sought-after international guest star. In addition to her dancing, Ms. Sisk was featured on the CW's Breaking Point television show for 2 seasons. Beckanne, hello and welcome to Bendy Bodies Podcast.

[02:36] Beckanne Sisk: Hello, thank you for having me.

[02:38] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Thank you so much for coming on. So we are very excited, Linda Bluestein and I, to chat with you about hypermobility and sort of your experience with it. And I would love to know, how early in your dance training did you realize that you had more range of motion than most people? And did you feel like it was an advantage because you were able to make pretty lines, or was it a disadvantage because you couldn't tell when your arms were straight but not too straight? Like, how did it start for you in the early ages?

[03:09] Beckanne Sisk: So I don't think that I realized that I was hypermobile and flexible until I was, I would say like 12, 13 is when I was like, oh wow, like this is different. I always knew like with my feet and ankles that they were hypermobile, but not so much like my hips and my back. I didn't really notice, right? but the older I got, or I feel like my teen years, I relied on my flexibility. I thought that that's what separated me from everyone and made me special. And at that time, I didn't realize that that's not all that it's about, you know. So I feel like I really leaned into that and would not listen to my teachers and they're like, you have to rein it in, you know? And I feel like it took me some time before I realized that it was something very difficult that I needed to start focusing on and pulling in and not just letting it all go.

[04:13] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So that's interesting that you're, even at that age, your teachers were seeing that and were saying to you, let's pull that back and let's gain control of it. And not necessarily pushing you into it, encouraging you to do more bendy, bigger things. Is that accurate?

[04:29] Beckanne Sisk: Yes.

[04:30] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's great. So, how did your teachers help you learn how to get your hypermobility under control? Were there things that they did that were really helpful or certain cueing or exercises? Like, how did they kind of help you come to that space?

[04:45] Beckanne Sisk: There was one teacher, Marilena Ruiz at the Rock School, and she was also an extremely flexible hypermobile dancer. And her way was— was growing up going through those school years, I didn't— I had trouble like listening to people. Like, I understood, but I didn't understand how to make changes necessarily. And I feel like when people were really hard and would tell me like, cause some teachers were like, you can't do that arabesque like that. Like it's a terrible line, blah, blah, blah. And for some reason that I like, I didn't like when people are like mean about it. But luckily I had Marilena who she took a different route. Cause I think she could see that that wasn't necessarily working for me. And she was more helpful in the way that she communicated that, you know, you should try this. Maybe this will look better. And she took a more like stand back approach with that and also would like, I feel like, make me do things over and over to get strength and then like throw in little strengthening exercises without like being too like aggressive about it. So I feel like she really helped me in that way and she was easy to connect with because I knew that she had gone through it too.

[06:15] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That makes sense, and that's, that's such an important theme for dancers with hypermobility, is kind of that slow and low burn approach rather than hard and fast and aggressive, is doing a little bit really well and, and, and throwing it, like you said, repeating it as long as you're doing it correctly several times and doing little extra exercises, but, but really taking that long-term approach. And that's fantastic that you had her. She's an amazing teacher.

[06:41] Beckanne Sisk: She is.

[06:42] Dr. Linda Bluestein: She is. And that was a great meeting up of her as a teacher and you as a student. And then do you feel like that has continued as an adult? Like you still kind of get that out of it with that same approach with directors and choreographers as opposed to the, you know, that's wrong versus the slow and low kind of nurturing?

[07:06] Beckanne Sisk: I feel like I have learned that contemporary stuff I can let go and really go into the, you know, flexibility and kind of, you know, work things out. You take it, you make it longer, and then distort. Whereas in classical, I have learned that I try to keep shoulders, hips pure, and then wherever my leg is, like, that's fine. I don't feel like— especially in a tutu, you don't want to, you know, right, be in like a full développé side split. It's just not as pretty. So I have found that in classical, just like more of like a little above 90 degrees, unless I'm doing a penché or something, is sort of my goal. And then contemporary is when I can just let it go. And I have found that my coaches and director and choreographers have all kind of understood that. And they tell me if I should go further or if I should hold back.

[08:02] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So you can rely on the people that you work with.

[08:05] Beckanne Sisk: Yeah.

[08:05] Dr. Linda Bluestein: To kind of—

[08:06] Beckanne Sisk: Yeah.

[08:06] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Rein you in and to not— and so you can just push yourself and then let them tell you when to pull back. That's great. So was there a point during your pre-professional transitioning to your professional career that you sort of took ownership of your wonky body, or is it something that you've just instinctively done with Marielena's help along the way, or how did that sort of adapt for you?

[08:33] Beckanne Sisk: Well, I feel like it was instinct, to be honest, because I got a lot of— in school, there were some teachers that I could tell just didn't know how to work with me and would just be like, you can't do that, like, that looks bad. And it wasn't in like a helpful, like, that doesn't look good, so let's try this. It was more of just like, that's bad and that looks weird, you know, and I didn't know how to fix that. So I feel like over the years, having all the different kinds of teachers and having them feel different ways about, my body, I just kind of put it all together and I feel like I slowly figured out everything.

[09:24] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So do you find, or did you find, as you were kind of putting all of that together, that, you know, everybody thinks it's such a blessing to have hypermobility because you can let it all hang out, and they think, oh, poor you, you have to learn how to hold it in, right, or how to rein it in. But along with that, there comes a lot of inherent weakness as well. So did you find that you were kind of keeping up with the strength as you were learning to manage it, or did you actively have to seek out new ways to strengthen, like cross-training and that kind of thing?

[09:55] Beckanne Sisk: I had to seek out like cross-training. I now, I love going to the gym. One of my favorite things is lifting weights. I just, I love it. It's something that I, I love that you can see your progression, right? So easy, like the numbers are right there, you know, so it's like you see and you feel so good. But I found, and that took me, it was later in my career that I realized that that was what I needed to do to get a step up because I feel like I had been kind of, you know, here and to really get better and be able to control my body, I needed to start doing something else and I realized that the gym and lifting weights and just really strengthening my whole body was what needed to be done.

[10:44] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So what does a typical week look like for you then as far as cross-training and and other types of maintenance, stretching or meeting with a coach who really works on the small things or massage or like what, what does that sort of look like for you?

[11:00] Beckanne Sisk: So, we usually, if we're not performing, we work Monday through Fridays and those will be about 7.5-hour days including class and I'll wake up in the morning go to the gym at 8, get to the studio around like 9:10, 9:15, and then we have class for an hour and a half and then rehearse for 6 hours. Then at the end of the day, I will either come home and I hate staying. I'm bad about like staying at the studio, going to PT and like making myself do everything there. I just want to leave and get home. So that's where I usually like, I get home. If I feel like I need to ice, I'll ice usually my feet. Do that and then just kind of relax.

[11:49] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So you like to get your, your cross-training or your physical maintenance first thing in the morning?

[11:56] Beckanne Sisk: Yes, yes, yes. If I don't do it in the morning, it doesn't happen.

[12:01] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And that's something for a lot of dancers— where do they find the time without being exhausted and without over-pushing themselves? So that's totally right, typical. So let me ask, I know a lot of people are going to want to know, you have amazing feet. Right?

[12:15] Beckanne Sisk: Thank you.

[12:16] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I cannot tell you how many times my students have sent to me that clip of you in Giselle with the penché and then pressing up into that relevé. And they're like, look at her penché. And I'm like, who's looking at the penché? Look at that relevé afterwards. Linda, if you have not seen it, you should see it. It was the— it's the most amazing strength thing I have seen from feet like those. So But with feet like those, again, and ankles like those comes a lot of inherent instability. So do you do regular foot strengthening exercises? Do you do extra ankle strengthening stuff? Like, what does that look like for you?

[12:54] Beckanne Sisk: I usually always before class I'll do TheraBand exercises. So like flex foot, like rotating in, out, point, all of that. And then also I just really try and focus when I put my pointe shoes on, rolling through. And even if, like, say it's not happening at that time, as long as I'm thinking and like my brain is thinking about it, I feel like it's working my body whether it's happening or not down there. As long as I have the like mental thought of it, I feel that it helps a lot.

[13:34] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So you just do small little things mentally to stay on top of it and just basic warm-ups before class. Is it, is it something that's always kind of at the forefront? Is it something that you worry about, like potential injury-wise, ankle stability? Or are you just like, no, I'm on top of this, I got it?

[13:53] Beckanne Sisk: Oh, I feel like I, I twist my ankle a lot just walking, like when I'm not in the studio. That's when I seem to hurt myself. But, while I'm in the studio, I, I'm really not afraid of injury. I should knock on wood, but, we'll do it.

[14:12] Dr. Linda Bluestein: We'll all do it.

[14:14] Beckanne Sisk: Yeah. I feel like as long as mentally I'm just trying to work correct and not push myself to do crazy I feel like you just have to take it slow. Mm-hmm. Just be thoughtful.

[14:32] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, I love that. So speaking of taking it slow and being thoughtful, I know that a lot of dancers with hypermobility find that they have to listen to their bodies more than, than regular dance or non-hypermobile dancers do, and they kind of have to stay on top of those little small things that they hear and feel because they quickly become big things. And the big things like tendinopathies tend to take a longer time to heal in hypermobile dancers. So does your, does your hypermobility sort of shape how you approach your work weeks and how you try to, how you try to sort of set out your schedule and acclimatize yourself to the work and kind of plan it, like self-monitoring and pacing yourself? Does that change how you approach everything?

[15:21] Beckanne Sisk: Yeah, so I find that those of us that are more hypermobile than others, I feel like we get tighter because we're having to use our muscles more to control everything. So I feel like for us stretching is huge, like my calves and my feet, my arches are always cramping, right? Like I just feel like walking around just kills my feet and calves and I feel like it's because I'm having to think so hard about how to do it correctly, right, and control everything. So I feel like for us, we get a lot tighter and we're a lot more sore. I feel like stretching throughout the day, whenever you have a chance, always— like, I stretch my calves. Like, I feel like I'm— anytime I'm just standing on the side, I'm stretching my calves or my, like, Achilles, you know, the bent knee pliés. But yeah, I think for us stretching is just extremely important because we do— like even my back, my shoulders, everything, it's just like I'm constantly like controlling with my muscles, so they do just get tighter.

[16:33] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And it gets mentally exhausting as well, just trying to like mentally hold yourself together as you're walking down the street.

[16:40] Beckanne Sisk: It's easier to let go. Yeah, right. Yeah, it's easier to let things go, right?

[16:45] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And it's so much harder to restrain yourself. Yeah, yeah, absolutely.

[16:40] Beckanne Sisk: Yeah, yeah.

[16:51] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And that's so ironic because I think a lot of people don't understand that hypermobile dancers can be tight in their muscles even though their joints can be, you know, more loose and more hypermobile. So I think oftentimes they don't understand that. So do you have any suggestions for younger dancers in terms of how you stretch your body in a way that's more safe? Because when you're hypermobile, you can stretch your body in a way that is not going to be helpful. You can end up overstretching ligaments and things even more than they already are. So do you have any certain things that you've learned over the years in terms of safely stretching?

[17:26] Beckanne Sisk: So I have learned that warming up before I stretch is a big thing for me. So I'll try to do, like, for instance, I just do like a plank on my forearms, a regular plank to kind of start the day. And I'll lift up my back legs like one at a time in the plank. And I I feel like that just kind of warms up my entire body, and then I'll go into like stretching, but not like over splits and stuff. It's very rare that I actually do my over splits these days, but usually it's more of just like warming up my body and doing strengthening exercises. But my stretching isn't necessarily— which I'm not saying that this is the right thing. I feel like everyone, you know, stretch away. But for me, I have not continued. Like, as a young dancer, I feel like maybe I overstretched too much, you know, and sometimes it hurts. Like, it just made me hurt throughout the day. So I feel like don't push it too far, especially if you're already flexible. Just warm up and stretch, you know, just do your splits, middle splits, you know, warm up your back and stuff, but sometimes overstretching is not good.

[18:42] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right. Well, and we have had that conversation as well with other experts who've talked about if you're hypermobile, we don't want to stretch you further, we want to give you the strength to hold what you've got. And so it sounds like you're sort of coming from that same place, which I think is so wise to me because the benefit of sitting in an oversplit is really nothing compared to the benefit of finding the strength to hold your splits in your grand sauté de chat, right?

[19:14] Beckanne Sisk: Yeah, yeah, and I feel like the oversplit— I have never done an oversplit and then been like, oh look, I can hold my leg up here now. It's more of like when I do workouts to strengthen my muscles, then I can hold my leg up.

[19:27] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

[19:27] Beckanne Sisk: You know, it's not necessarily about stretching. It's straight, right?

[19:31] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yep, I agree. Yes, yes, yes. And I love what you were talking about with the TheraBands because with your hypermobile feet, I think that it's so important for people to understand that when you use a TheraBand, you know, that's not like lifting some big massive weight, but you're learning to control the range of motion all the way— control the movement, excuse me— all the way through the entire range of motion, right? So with your beautiful gorgeous feet I think it's so fabulous for dancers to hear that you're doing these kinds of exercises that might not be super exciting, but they get the job done, right? So, yeah. And I thought it was really interesting when you mentioned that you sometimes sprain your ankles just walking. So, can you talk a little bit more about how that happens and how other injuries have impacted you?

[20:19] Beckanne Sisk: Yeah. Well, I find that it's the second that I'm not thinking. Like, in the studio, I feel like I'm always, like, aware. But the second, you know, like I take a step outside, I don't see a step, I don't see a hole, you know, it's just things like when I'm not aware of everything, that's when it all goes down.

[20:39] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, well, and how do those injuries sort of affect you in class? Do you feel like you come back a little bit slower than everybody else? Do you know how to handle your body and how to kind of get back into it. I don't— if other injuries that you've had, have they changed the way that you approach coming back into dance and coming back into a season?

[21:03] Beckanne Sisk: So I have been so lucky. Once again, I'm going to knock on wood. I have never— I've only had one injury that has taken me out of a show.

[21:15] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Everybody knock on wood right now because that's fantastic.

[21:17] Beckanne Sisk: I know, right? Right? But I had— and of course it was a weird one. It wasn't like I just did something, you know, and like twisted my ankle. It was over time I noticed my right ankle— and I don't know, maybe this has to do with my hypermobility. I never really figured out what caused it, but over time all of a sudden my right ankle started feeling really stiff and then the more and more I did, I just quit being able to like go on pointe and like rolling down, it hurt. And then all of a sudden I got like this bubble on the top of my foot and it was like fluid. And I was like, okay, this is weird. I need to figure this out. And it turns out I just had fluid in my ankle joint. So they had to go in and suck it out, which was honestly like a very easy— I don't even know if you can call it a procedure, to be honest. Just a tiny little needle and like pulling fluid out, but it came back twice again. So it was like it just continued to fill up, and so now I'm kind of like just waiting for it to happen again. But that's really been the only like injury that I have had.

[22:35] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wow, that—

[22:36] Beckanne Sisk: I've been really lucky, and I hate to comment on injuries because I feel like I have just gotten very— been very fortunate.

[22:47] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, and I think that also speaks to the people like Marilena in your life who have sort of helped bring you along in a really healthy way, and to Adam for seeing your potential and not immediately throwing you into every single thing as a 17 or 18-year-old, but looking at it for sort of the long haul and helping you sort of gradually grow into yourself as an artist and also as an athlete. So you've been so fortunate to have some great people in your career that have kind of shepherded you along with that big picture in mind. That's, that's fantastic. Yeah, absolutely. I would love to know about your working with, with a partner, so, and how your hypermobility might have impacted that. So For example, like, do you have to be especially careful of your shoulder sockets, like where your shoulder is in the joint and that kind of thing? When you're working with a partner, can you kind of safely go to your full end range, or do you kind of have to be more careful because you have somebody else that's, you know, involved in those movements?

[23:51] Beckanne Sisk: You know, you actually, like, hearing this question out loud made me realize that I think the moment that I started realizing that I needed to strengthen and like reel it in was when I had to start partnering more. It's because I, I think at first I was a very difficult partner because I mean there was a lot going on. And I feel like sometimes for those of us that are hypermobile, I think that whenever we're dancing alone, it's easy for us to find our center in a way. And not— maybe we're probably not even on a real center, but it feels like it works for us. You know, we can like, right, it works.

[24:32] Dr. Linda Bluestein: We have our systems.

[24:33] Beckanne Sisk: Once you— yeah, so once I got with a partner, it was no longer like it's just me dancing. I had to find my true center for a partner to be able to manipulate and help. And so, yeah, that once I started partnering and when I'm with a partner, it I feel that my focus changes and I just try to be strong. I don't know if that makes sense. It's like an overall just like held.

[25:10] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So you feel like you have to, right, you feel like you have to do more to be able to give him what he needs to be able to work with, right? You can't just kind of let yourself go and make him responsible for cleaning it all up.

[25:26] Beckanne Sisk: Right, because they have— yeah, right, that's true, because they have no idea. It's like, whoa, you know?

[25:34] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's funny. That is funny. And did you, when you were talking about when you were younger and working with different teachers that maybe were phrasing things in different ways that were challenging for you to maybe incorporate into your body, do you think part of that is because over the years you've had to train yourself how to feel your body? I mean, you clearly now are really expert at that. And I think that's a huge reason why you've had such an incredibly successful career. That and tons and tons of hard work, of course. But do you feel like you really had to train yourself to be able to feel your body, where it is in space and that kind of thing, that you had to really work hard at that?

[26:13] Beckanne Sisk: Yes. And another thing that I feel that had helped me learned from— okay, so hearing from teachers, you know, that, you know, going to your full potential flexibility-wise looked bad. So hearing that from them, you know, you don't really understand. You're like, this is, you know, I think this is beautiful, you know. You don't feel that it's like out of whack, right? So I feel like the more I saw professional dancers and the more I watched videos and could see that like a pure classical line was just beautiful, I was like, I understand. So I feel like it was more of like a visual thing for me that kind of helped that. And then also remembering all the things that my teachers had said, it all just kind of came together.

[27:09] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Did you feel when you were younger and you would dance that you looked one way and you kind of occupied space in a certain way, and then you would see a video and be like, wow, that is not what it felt like at all.

[27:21] Beckanne Sisk: Yes, and I still do that. I still see videos and I'm like, "Oh, I felt way better than that." I think all dancers, I think all dancers are critical of themselves on video.

[27:21] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I do.

[27:35] Beckanne Sisk: You can't help it.

[27:36] Dr. Linda Bluestein: But with hypermobility, there's a lot of times a lack of proprioception. And so, you know, I would think my arm was beautifully bent and see the video and be like, wow, that elbow was really whacked out there, you know, just not knowing where your body stops until you've practiced over and over again what that feels like to make that beautiful line.

[27:59] Beckanne Sisk: Yeah, and a lot of coaches that have come in, I noticed like throughout my career, they all are like want to work on my arms, and that's something I never like thought of, you know, because I always thought it was my hips and my legs that were the like crazy mobile things. And then the more and more they're like, no, like, what are you doing? I realized like, you know, I was just like going, whereas it's like, no, you have to hold your back and let's work on this. And then it made sense. But it took me a long time to kind of understand the arm thing.

[28:34] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I am so glad that you mentioned that because I think a lot of people think of arms as like from the shoulder down and don't think about the back and the rib cage. And the importance of all of that. And if you don't have a stable shoulder girdle, then you can't support your arms in the way that you need to in order to do all the beautiful things that you want to do. So I'm so glad that you mentioned that.

[28:57] Beckanne Sisk: Yeah, I feel like that's another thing that partnering taught me was like doing a promenade. Like, I would just try to, you know, put my arm there, but then it's like, no, like, that comes from your back, right? And there's so much more to it. So I feel like that's what also kind of made everything click. That more of like, it's a, it's a whole body thing. Like, you have to think about your whole body. It's not just one movement, which is just your leg, you know. It's everything. We're connected.

[29:27] Dr. Linda Bluestein: When you were younger, do you think that the whole strength— and I mean strength as in being able to, you know, control and have these beautiful fluid muscles, not, you know— I love that you, that you go to the gym because I think so many and now it's more popular than back when I trained, but, you know, I think so many dancers, they think, oh my God, I'm going to get this big bulky muscle. Was that developing the strength, was that something that really came along over time that you, you know, I think you mentioned maybe in your teens that that's when you really started to realize how important that was?

[30:04] Beckanne Sisk: Well, when I was a young student, I had no strength. And I honestly, I was like, the gym? Like, I dance all day. I don't need to go to the gym. So it took me, like, I honestly feel like, because I came to Ballet West at 17, it took me a couple years after I got here. It's like slowly during my first 2 years, I would watch the other dancers and they were so strong. And I remember being like, Okay, I'm missing something. And I feel like that's— it took me a couple of years to realize it's the strength, and I needed to do something besides just ballet. That wasn't going to do it, you know? Yeah.

[30:53] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, that's fantastic. And you've spoken up about having scoliosis and having to work with that as well. Do you feel like issues with, you know, like having the hypermobility and the flexibility have and the scoliosis have made you a better dancer because you've had to overcome, or not overcome, but really learn to work with these things. And like with the hypermobility, not just using it, but actually working with it. And can you talk a little bit about like some of those things?

[31:21] Beckanne Sisk: Yeah. I am honestly, I'm so thankful to be, to have, I mean, people, like you said earlier, hypermobility people are like, oh, that's lucky, which it is, it is lucky, but it takes a lot of work, right, to control, right? And that, between that and my scoliosis, I feel like I wouldn't be who I am or where I am without the, the work that both of the things had brought me. And honestly, when I started dancing, I, I knew at the Rock School that I knew, like, I had talent. But I thought that that's all, all I needed was what I had. I didn't understand that it takes so much more. And I am so glad that I feel like having my setbacks and with my back, it made me realize I have to do a lot more. And I think it trained me mentally and really made me like focus and work harder because I did. I totally relied on my facility for years, for years. And I know I'm thankful that, yeah, it took growing up for sure, to learn that you can't just rely on that because you will not get to your full potential.

[32:49] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's great. Yeah, yeah, absolutely. And there's some roles that you've talked about, that really pushed you outside your comfort zone, like Balanchine's Rubies, and you talked about all the trunk stability that that required. what roles have— do you gravitate towards and feel really good in your body in?

[33:10] Beckanne Sisk: oh, this is hard. I have to say both 'Cause I always approach things, new things scare me. So like I'm always nervous when we're learning something new. I just am nervous about it and I never can like see myself doing well. But it's not until like I have learned it and start doing it that then I'm like, oh wow, okay. I feel like there hasn't really been anything that I have disliked dancing, to be honest. But, My favorite roles to kind of, roles to dance, I will have to say have been Cranko's Romeo and Juliet and then Cranko's Onegin. There's something that's, it's still classical, but it's a little different. It's not like Sleeping Beauty. I have to say Sleeping Beauty is probably my least favorite thing that I've done.

[34:05] Dr. Linda Bluestein: The truth comes out.

[34:06] Beckanne Sisk: There's something about just like being so free and having a character that you truly connect with, I feel like just changes everything. Just, it's so freeing.

[34:19] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely. I, I actually saw you do Rubies in Dallas when you came into Dallas for the, you know, one of the gala things. And yeah, and I remember hearing that you were going to do that and I was thinking, okay, let's see that. Just because I know with your hypermobility, I was like, this will be interesting to see because it's not really, it's not classical ballet, right? But it doesn't give you the freedom of contemporary. So you can't like go all the way into it. So I was really interested to see, and you did it, obviously you did a great job of being, finding that center, but then also having that, that being able to go off of it and being able to kind of let everything else go loose. And that, it was really encouraging to me to see you do something like that. When what I had seen purely on videos and stuff was more of the classical ballet stuff or the pure contemporary, which where you really kind of dive in and let it all go, you know, which has to feel super freeing. Do you, do you feel a difference? Obviously you feel a difference, but do you dive into contemporary choreography differently than you might climb into a full-length ballet like Giselle? Do you feel a difference in the way you kind of approach it and prepare for it?

[35:36] Beckanne Sisk: Yes. So, I mean, for a ballet like Giselle or even Rubies, it's more of like I need to find my balance. So it's like I need to work on, you know, passé balances and just slow, like finding my center. But then contemporary, it's more about my like weight transfer. So to warm up for like, say I'm about to run through Giselle, I'm gonna do like relevés and like passé and really try to find my center. But with contemporary, I usually try to like do like weight transfer things, so like pushing off one leg to another, and then also like trying to like move and then stand up and balance in a way. So I feel like I definitely approach both things differently.

[36:27] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's, that's really interesting. Yeah. And are there certain roles that you haven't had the opportunity to do yet but that you were— would really like to do?

[36:37] Beckanne Sisk: Oh gosh, this is always like the hard one because I feel like there's so many that I would like to go back and do because like my first full-length was Don Q Kitri, and I was— had not figured everything out yet, and that was like my first time really partnering. So I feel like I was just learning that the control that I needed, and so I would love to go back and try that again because I go back and look at videos and I mean, I'm like kicking my legs as high, which Kitri does, you know, like it's, it's okay in Kitri, but it's like just, you could tell I'm not thinking, you know, I'm just doing. And I would love to give that a try again.

[37:27] Dr. Linda Bluestein: You probably now have a different sense about like the quality of movements and things like that that you could give more attention to that. And actually, that's a perfect lead into my next question, which was, what advice would you give your younger self if you, if you could do that?

[37:44] Beckanne Sisk: Would be listen. Just listen to the people that are trying to help you. The strength, like, I remember so many people telling me you need core strength. That was like one thing I heard all the time, and I just didn't understand. I thought, you know, just like 50 crunches before class would be enough for me back then, but it's like there's just so much more you have to work on. Every— like your entire core and also back, back strength is just— I just feel like your core and your back is just like two of the most important things. And I wish that I had known that and listened because so many people told me that, but I just— it just didn't— I didn't understand.

[38:29] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, sure. And what about other hypermobile young dancers? Gangly hypermobile young dancers out there, what advice would you give to them?

[38:39] Beckanne Sisk: I would say do crunches, do sit-ups, and planks are the worst but they're the best. But they really are the worst, I hate them so much, but they're so important. But just strengthen, stop stretching so much and think more about the warm-up and strengthening.

[39:03] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Could you say that one more time?

[39:06] Beckanne Sisk: Yes.

[39:08] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Because that is such an— it's perfect to have this. Yeah. Could you just repeat that again?

[39:15] Beckanne Sisk: Yeah. My advice for the young gangly dancers out there would be stop stretching, just stop and start strengthening. So do your sit-ups, do your planks, strength. That's the most important thing is the strength.

[39:31] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Thank you, all of my dancers listening. You don't listen to me, hopefully you listen to Beckanne Sisk. So Beckanne, could you tell us what we should be advising dancers? What do you want young dancers in particular to know when it comes to things like social media? They're seeing all kinds of, you know, accounts that are publishing lots of videos and images, and I think it's influencing a lot of young dancers, and I would love to hear your take on that and what kind of messages that maybe they should be getting instead.

[40:11] Beckanne Sisk: So I know all over social media you see people posting with their legs, you know, whacked, tilt, crazy things. But you have to just remember a photo is a second. And you want to be able to do those things. You want to be able to hold those things. So stop stretching and do exercise. It's all about strength. So to be able to get your leg up there, whether you're contorted or not, it takes strength, you know, not just a whack and then down. So strengthening exercises are so important. And I feel like maybe cut back on stretching and just think about exercises that you can do to build up your body to be able to hold those positions that you see pictures of that you love on social media.

[41:00] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's great, thank you. Yes, thank you so much. And, and where can people learn more about you? And, you know, I'm— I know you have amazing work out there, and, what would be the best place for people to I'm sure on the Ballet West website, of course, but are there certain things that people can find on YouTube or wherever they might be able to go to see more videos? Instagram account. Yeah, yep, yep, that kind of stuff.

[41:30] Beckanne Sisk: Yeah, I would say I am most active on my Instagram. So if anyone ever has questions or anything, like, don't hesitate to reach out. I'm an open book for the most part. But yeah, I've been trying I know like through this pandemic, it's been difficult, but I want to be able to communicate more with the young kids and my audience. And just about like my experience learning, because I feel like as a kid, I, I had trouble listening. And that's something that I regret. And now that I've learned, I want to be able to, you know, tell people my story and help. I just want to help and give advice. Yeah.

[42:10] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's fantastic. And that's something that I think is such a gift that you're offering to young dancers that I hope that they take you up on it because that's amazingly generous and kind. Well, it's been so much fun chatting with you today. And y'all have been listening to Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD. Today, our guest has been Beckanne Sisk, principal dancer at Ballet West and international guest star. And Beckanne, we are just so grateful to you for coming on the Bendy Bodies podcast today and sharing so much information and sharing your story with us.

[42:47] Beckanne Sisk: Thank you so much for having me. This was so much fun. I feel like I learned a lot, so this is great. I had such a good time.

[42:54] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, thank you so much for coming on. Thank you for listening to the Bendy Bodies podcast. Please visit our website www.bendybodies.org for more information and to access the show notes. If you are enjoying this podcast, please remember to subscribe and leave a review. For a limited time, you could win an autographed copy of the popular textbook Disjointed: Navigating the Diagnosis and Management of Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome and Hypermobility Spectrum Disorders just by giving us a shout out on Instagram or Facebook and tagging @BendyBodiesPodcast. The thoughts and opinions expressed on this podcast are solely of the co-hosts and their guests. They do not necessarily represent the views and opinions of any organization. The thoughts and opinions do not constitute medical advice and should not be used in any legal capacity whatsoever. We'll catch you next time on the Bendy Bodies Podcast.
