---
num: 20
title: 20. Building Better Bone Strength with Rebekah Rotstein
date: '2020-10-22'
duration: 1h 26m
description: "Osteoporosis is a disease that affects tens of millions of people each year. Dancers and other high-level athletes are often at higher risk due to low body weight, increased time indoors, and suboptimal nutritional support.\_\nRebekah Rotstein is a former pre-professional dancer who received a shocking diagnosis of osteoporosis at age 28, and then spent the next several years looking for ways to optimize her bone strength through exercise and nutrition. Rebekah is a movement educator and certified Pilates instructor who has presented at conferences and symposia around the world on the topics of bone health, anatomy and movement, and is the founder of Buff Bones®, a research-supported system combining education and focused exercises aimed at the optimization of bone and joint health.\_\nRebekah shares the knowledge she’s gained in her extensive research on osteoporosis and stresses that a diagnosis isn’t the end of the world but rather a test for advocating for oneself. She discusses why bone density is especially important for those with hypermobility disorders. She theorizes on why dancers should be informed about osteoporosis, and emphasizes the importance of finding a good nutritionist, trainer, and more.\_\nFinally, Rebekah shares how her diagnosis planted a desire to help people with osteoporosis, and to help future generations prevent it.\_\nLinks: https://buff-bones.com/ https://www.instagram.com/gotbuffbones/?hl=en https://www.instagram.com/rebekahrotstein/?hl=en Rebekah@buff-bones.com"
tags:
 - Nutrition
 - Exercise
 - Diagnosis
 - Hypermobility
 - Research
audioUrl: >-
 https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH5076358313.mp3?updated=1721669955
videoUrl: 'https://youtu.be/SVRS75R3zGo'
snippets: []
guests:
 - Rebekah Rotstein
guestImages: []
---
[00:35] Rebekah Rotstein: Welcome to Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD, where we explore the intersection of health and hypermobility for dancers and other artistic athletes. This is co-host Jennifer Milner here today with Dr. Linda Bluestein. Before we introduce today's special guest, please remember to subscribe to the Bendy Bodies podcast and leave us a review. This really helps grow the audience and increase awareness about hypermobility and associated disorders. This podcast is for you.

Today we have the great pleasure of speaking with Rebekah Rotstein, an industry leader in Pilates, bone health, and movement education. She's the creator of the medically endorsed Buff Bones system with trained instructors in more than 30 countries. She presents throughout the U.S. and internationally and at conferences in the Pilates industry and beyond, including the International Osteoporosis Foundation Worldwide Conference. She pursued her love of anatomy training in Pilates at the Kain School in New York City under the tutelage of Kelly Kain, where she later joined the teacher training faculty. When she was diagnosed with osteoporosis at age 28, her focus took on a new direction to share insights and options to those with low bone density and exercise professionals caring for them.

Her work is in the field of osteoporosis and led Hatherleigh Medical Education to invite her to write an evidence-based continuing education paper on osteoporosis and exercise, which later encouraged her to develop the Buff Bones exercise system for bone and joint health. Rebekah serves as a longstanding ambassador for American Bone Health and worked as a partner of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. She's a longstanding visiting instructor at the online studio Pilates Anytime. Rebekah, welcome to Bendy Bodies.

Thanks for having me. I'm excited to be here with you both.

Well, we are so excited to have you, right, Linda?

[02:39] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh yes, super excited to chat with you.

[02:43] Rebekah Rotstein: And I should say also at the outset that Rebekah and I are friends for about 15 years, maybe, probably more than that. Yes. I was one of Rebekah's Pilates teacher trainers. So I trained Rebekah to be a Pilates teacher. And then we have been fortunate enough to be able to stay friends through the years moving through, and I'm so proud of what you have accomplished, Rebekah. So proud.

Thank you, Jen. I think it's actually, it's like 18 years now.

Oh, thank you. I feel much better. Wow.

[03:17] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's incredible.

[03:19] Rebekah Rotstein: It is incredible. So Rebekah, you have been a pre-professional dancer. You have hypermobility and you had some serious injuries and were diagnosed at an incredibly early age with osteoporosis. So let's start at the beginning. You're dancing. You've got a wonky body, you get injured. So tell us about that.

So the first time that I really realized that there was something going on was I was at Boston Ballet School and I was having a lot of problems with my Achilles. And I went to the company doctor and I started seeing their physical therapist. And then it just continued onward from there. Same thing at San Francisco Ballet School. And I kept going on and discovering that these ankles were causing me a lot of problem. And it was diagnosed as chronic Achilles tendonitis. But, and that's why I quit. But then I learned later that it was far more than that. And now from what I realize, it really was a very different diagnosis than that, than what was given. That was really just the symptoms of it. And it all stems from the joint hypermobility throughout my body, but I never thought of it that way because I never had amazing extensions. I didn't have these incredible feet. I just seemed to have pain, but it didn't seem that— I didn't think I was hypermobile. I just thought that I had more laxity than the average person, but looking back, there are so many signs going back even to beyond or prior to that when I was an ice skater, where you see pictures of me at 3 years old and my ankles are totally collapsing inwards.

Oh my gosh.

With all the others who seem to have straight parallel feet and well-aligned structures. So this has been a lifelong thing. It's just, I didn't realize it at the time. So I ended up quitting. I got to the point, I guess, where at North Carolina School of the Arts, I was sitting out for most of class and only joining rehearsal. Essentially, so that I could perform. And I was, I decided I was about to quit when I was about to consider this offer that was happening where Fernando Bujones was creating a new company down in Tampa or in Southern Florida. And I thought I would go that route, but then I just realized I'm just in so much pain and this is just, I'm done. So I decided to quit dancing and I went to college instead. And then that took me on a very different route where I began working in the sports medicine department of my college thinking I'd go to physical therapy school. So I still was surrounding myself by injuries, they just weren't my own. And I thought that that would be my path, and then I decided I just needed to get away from the body 100% and never deal with it again.

It really lasts. It lasted a couple years.

Yeah, how did that work?

Yeah, it worked out really well. The first, I'd say, 5 years after I graduated college and I went to, I moved to New York, I wasn't working with anything with the body, but I was seeing one of the big dance medicine physicians there who dealt with the Joffrey for my injuries. And he started doing injections, prolotherapy, which was extremely excruciatingly painful, but it turns out that was coming from my sacroiliac instability. So that was part of what was leading down to the discomfort and the pain through my ankles. So that was the first indication to me that there is some sort of relationship where the symptoms are not necessarily the source of the problem.

Yeah, that's, that's such a huge thing for you to learn. Hopefully some people learn it while they're still dancing, but not everybody does, you know. But a benefit of the injury process was that it introduced you to Pilates.

Yes.

And started something that has, I think, really had an impact on the exercise world with what you're doing. So you were always a very gifted Pilates teacher. I should know. But I know that the diagnosis at age 28 of osteoporosis, it absolutely reshaped your teaching and your focus. So talk about how you got that diagnosis, like what, why were people even looking for that, and what happened immediately afterwards?

Sure. Well, thanks to you actually, Jen. My interest in special populations that I'd already had from injuries led me to teach the special populations curriculum — I should say this led me to teach the special populations curriculum like yourself at the Kain School. So I was already teaching about osteoporosis. So I had some knowledge about it. And then I started taking some additional workshops just out of conferences. I was interested in it. And then when I was diagnosed, I was shocked. And the reason I even got a DEXA scan, a bone density scan in the first place, was because one of the workshops that I had attended had pointed out a staggering statistic for me, at least at the time. The statistic was that 98% of your bone density is developed by the time you're 18 to 20. The statistic varies a bit, but it's around that, that the majority of your bone density you develop in your teenage years.

And when I was dancing, like many dancers, I had stopped menstruating. I had weighed a very, very low amount. I weighed 82 pounds throughout my whole dance career. Granted, I'm only 5 feet tall. But still, I was very small and I'd only menstruated for one of those teenage years. So I knew from everything that I was learning that I was at a predisposition for osteoporosis. It ran in my family. Both parents had it. And so I decided, let me just get a bone density test to see as a baseline where I am now for once I hit menopause later. And it just came back with very disturbing, shocking results. Which were that I already had osteoporosis according to that classification.

So I got very depressed. I got very upset, partly because I still identified as a dancer, or at least you have— you're never going to not be a dancer in your mind, no matter where your life takes you. And so I identified so wholeheartedly with my body, and it had so many ramifications from the idea that I would fracture to the idea that from all that I had learned and studied already, I knew that I was going to have to completely alter my Pilates repertoire and my personal practice because I knew already what was contraindicated in terms of movements for osteoporosis and mobility.

So eventually I took action after I allowed myself to grieve as, as was needed at the time. I started talking to physical therapists that I knew, reached out to other physicians, and I started just doing my own research and finding out what I could do for myself. I visited an endocrinologist and that gave me a lot of information that I think is critical for people still now that I think gets overlooked by the just simplistic or oversimplified version of a diagnosis. You have it, you have to treat it, and these are the ways you do it. And I think there's a lot of gray area in there that is dismissed, unfortunately.

Okay, so you, you started researching. You got— first you got sad, then you got angry, and you started researching, right? Trying to figure out what you were going to do. And you chose to go see nutritionists, endocrinologists. You kind of pieced together your own sort of plan, right? Because as you said, options for treatment right then weren't really— they weren't really a lot of that gray area. They were more, as you said, here's what you have, now it's time to treat it. And my guess is that what they talked about as your treatment wasn't necessarily what you thought should be the start and end of the conversation. So talk a little bit more about that.

So in the medical world, treatment equates to medication, certainly in the osteoporosis world. And so the first thing I was told by the treating physician initially was, all right, the bad news is you have osteoporosis. The good news is there's medication that you can take. That pretty much sent me into a complete sob story right there. But the more I looked up, okay, well, let me learn about the medications. Well, medications, certainly at the time, not a single one had been tested on premenopausal women. So I was in childbearing years. What are the ramifications and possible side effects that that could have that had been completely ignored?

Let alone the more I learned about osteogenesis and bone resorption, the metabolism of how your skeletal system works. The medications, the predominant medications, except for one single medication, all suppress your bone turnover. So in other words, what they do is they halt bone breakdown. But it turns out, as I learned through getting blood and urine tests, I wasn't having a problem of bone breakdown. So the mechanism by which these medications would have treated me would not have been logical. They wouldn't have actually treated what was going on.

So it turns out I had a vitamin D deficiency, which now everybody talks about, but back in 2004, you know, certainly in research papers it was discussed, but clinically and definitely mainstream on blogs — well, blogs probably didn't really exist — but throughout the internet, you didn't hear about vitamin D deficiencies. So I was able to get certain blood markers and also urine tests to identify, well, was there anything else underlying? Was there something going on with my endocrine system, which is very common for people? Okay, check, that was not it. Was there celiac disease? Like all these other things that can be second causes of secondary osteoporosis essentially.

but what we did identify, the only thing we really identified was that I had a vitamin D deficiency and that alone, remineralizing my bones, increased my bone density. But at the same time, I think it's interesting to identify that I also changed my diet and I also sought out the assistance of a trainer who is a colleague of both of ours. Deb Goodman had put me in touch with Jeff Bell, who became my longtime trainer from probably what, 2005 until I moved away in 2019. So I think there was just the interesting part is that there is a number of other factors that have to be identified and ruled out on the course to treatment, on the course to identifying a plan. And back then, and still I think very frequently, these other factors are not looked at and considered.

I absolutely agree with you.

[15:20] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That, that's super interesting. Almost at the exact— 2004 sounds like about the same time that I got a diagnosis of osteoporosis. I'm older than you, so I was older than 28 by a fair bit, but I literally got a voicemail from my— it wasn't even my doctor, it was the nurse. They called, they left me a voicemail. You have osteoporosis. You can choose drug A or drug B. And that is literally all they said. And I had been asking him for years to test my vitamin D level because I was aware of some of the research and things, not necessarily even for bone health, but for mood and pain, because I already had pain at that point, and for sleep and stuff like that. So it's really fascinating, the parallels. I totally agree with you that, and I think part of that is because the healthcare system is so dysfunctional and it's all about time, and it's quicker to just say you have this, you can do this or this, done, you know.

[16:17] Rebekah Rotstein: So, and it's true, it's, it's, and it's still unfortunately to this day, I find it very myopic. I had gone with my mom to one of her physician appointments probably about 4 years ago, I would say at this point. And she has osteoporosis. She had been on the bisphosphonate medications, which are the most commonly used to treat osteoporosis. Actually, it's changing now, but I should say not necessarily bisphosphonates, but now antiresorptives, which is a larger classification of stopping the bone breakdown, essentially. And my mom had said at the time, well, what about exercise? With me there, her daughter who specializes in this, and the doctor says to her point-blank, exercise won't help. I had to pull myself back because this is still to this day very frequently stated, even though there's actually much greater evidence than there was then. And even then there was more evidence than there had been back in 2004 when I started investigating this. But the idea is, okay, you could say that there's limited evidence, but to say that there's no evidence is a complete fallacy.

And it's just interesting to see how even that has shifted in recent years. But still, I can share with you some of my challenges with the shortcomings even of research and the approach in the medical world where we have so much of an emphasis on bone density. And yet they've identified that there are more fractures that have occurred in osteopenia, which is the precursor to osteoporosis, than in actual osteoporosis. So in other words, more fractures occurring with a higher bone density. So that points to some kind of shortcoming in our diagnoses, in our outlook on this condition.

That is so interesting. And I see a lot because you have hypermobility. I have hypermobility. Linda has hypermobility. We all— everybody's hypermobile, right? It's all different degrees. I'm somewhere on the EDS/HSD spectrum depending on which labels you're looking at, and have fought with low vitamin D my whole life. At one point just a couple years ago, I switched doctors and she did a test we had done for a couple years and it was 12. Yes, 1, 2. So I have seen with my hypermobile dancers, you know, dancers are very prone to have low D. Everybody talks about that now, which I'm so grateful for. But especially in my hypermobile dancers, I've seen without any research to back it up that they have a harder time maintaining that. I don't know, Linda, if it's, people with— people who are on the spectrum have a harder time absorbing minerals in general. Have you seen anything like that, Linda?

[19:11] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's a good question. There are definitely gut issues that lead to, you know, more difficulty with absorbing. Definitely gut function is impaired in a lot of people that are on the spectrum, which I think is a good way to think of it. And of course, when you say on the spectrum, a lot of people think the autism spectrum, but now we're talking the hypermobility spectrum. Yeah, yeah. Because of course, everything we talk about is hypermobility.

So, so yes, I think that's definitely the case. There's also some genetic markers that we can look at that have to do with vitamin D incorporation and how well we work with vitamin D. And so there also could be genetic differences as well. So, and that's of course a very rapidly evolving field, so it's fascinating to look at. That pertains specifically to SNP testing, which is single nucleotide polymorphisms. So anyone that's had, you know, like 23andMe or some of those things done, and then you can actually pay a little bit of extra money to have them look at some of these SNPs. So it's— there's a lot of great information, so stay tuned for a lot of that stuff too.

[20:20] Rebekah Rotstein: Yes, absolutely. So, so you've got hypermobility, you have osteoporosis, you're young, they've told you start taking drugs, and you are not finding at the time a lot of compelling research that says don't take drugs, do exercise, right? Basically. So what made you exercise? Like, what, what was it? Is that just because that's what you knew and that's what you felt good doing? What, what made you seek Jeff out and start building that?

Well, that's the thing that's interesting is that there was evidence to show that exercise can improve your bone density. It's just for various reasons, the medical community was hesitant to adapt it and to adopt it. I would say the reasoning, as far as I can tell, is that it was limited in terms of, you know, needing longitudinal studies, but there was the famous Erlangen study that had looked at this. So there was research, and I think it was compelling research, but I think you needed more. You needed greater systematic reviews. You needed more meta-analyses. To be able to make the case for it, but there definitely was evidence. And so I looked at that evidence and I said, well, of course. And then also we already know from Wolff's Law that bone's going to respond to outside forces so that you can strengthen bone by loading it. So to me it was a no-brainer also just by the fact that I also was in the field.

And something that I think is interesting just going back to the history, my personal history, that I think may have been a savior for me with my hypermobility is that I had started ice skating when I was 3. So pretty much as soon as I could walk, I was ice skating. And as you probably know, with ice skating, there's a lot of load and force. That's way more, I would say, because you have velocity that is compounded in addition to gravity and height, that you get more impact going through your bones. I haven't looked at any research done on ice skaters, but I do believe that that helped my connective tissue system. The fact that I had had so much force generated when I was younger prior to even dancing. So I think that actually strengthened my joints more than I would have without that, but I already knew all of these basic facts just about weight bearing, about resistance and impact, not to the extent that I then started studying, but these were already part of my life to begin with.

But I had not been very intensely involved in progressive resistance weight training. So high intensity loading, as well as velocity training. So I had, I had worked out, but I had not been that diligent about it. I had done some throughout my 20s though. I'd gone to the gym, but I'd never had officially a trainer. And so that made me think, all right, well, I'm going to take this next path.

Well, and I remember watching you as you went through the diagnosis and then as you did your research and then as you started working with Jeff, and I remember seeing a clear difference in you physically as you seemed to take— as you took on muscle for sure, but you also inhabited your body in a different way and, and looked stronger, looked more— I don't want to say aggressive, but assertive physically in your frame. So I love that it did something for you, but then you also thought that you wanted to take that and do something for other people. And kind of move that on. So we know that it was your struggle through all of this, like your personal struggle that sort of led you to develop Buff Bones. And what made you feel like the world needs this program and I'm going to put it out there?

I really didn't. That's the funny part. Somebody else told me they did. So initially we had just created this workshop for osteoporosis as I was doing all this research about it, and I thought, wow, let me share some of this information, which coincided at the same time as I was creating a workshop on hypermobility. So I was simultaneously researching these two very different diagnoses, and at the time also, this was when it was the benign joint hypermobility syndrome. I remember thinking at the time, well, I guess it's benign because it's not affecting my organs, but darn, this sure doesn't feel benign to me.

[25:01] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

[25:02] Rebekah Rotstein: So I was simultaneously looking at both pathologies, if you will, and I had created this workshop, and probably about 2 years after I created the workshop, I was invited by Hatherleigh Medical Education to create a continuing education lesson and paper for exercise professionals about osteoporosis. So they were building out this whole other arm for exercise professionals in addition to their whole CME division for nurses and physicians. And I did a whole literature review, basically. That's how I started really delving into all the literature that was there, looking at all the evidence that was out there, and that's where I really started seeing what was available and what was being stated about exercise. And there, it was bountiful. Despite what people were thinking, there was plenty out there. And even if you look now, you'll see all sorts of citations in current literature that references things prior to 2004, even prior to 2002. But it was a matter, I think, of the word not spreading and reaching the ears that I think it needed to reach.

So then, probably about a year or so afterwards, after I'd done that, one of my colleagues who'd taken my osteoporosis workshop said, why don't you put together a whole program that is not just about all the science and the bone metabolism and about the medications and nutrition and movement, but why don't you take the movement part and actually create a whole program for it? And at first I thought, well, why does anybody need that? I said, I've just given you the tools to do it yourself. She's like, people actually want you to implement something. So that's how it came about, and it became actually a whole methodology and a system itself that follows these certain protocols, that follows essentially my belief of how you approach the body, that comes essentially from my hypermobile mind, or my attitude toward the way I treat my own body with hypermobility, and that the way I worked with every single client. And so I took that approach and put it into this system for bone health and it works magically.

So who is your target audience for this? Is it people who have already been diagnosed with osteoporosis, people who just want a good workout? Like where, where do the benefits come from or for whom do the benefits come?

It's really evolved actually much more than what my initial intention was. My intention initially was to help people with osteoporosis, to help people prevent osteoporosis, but also the part of the mission statement was to help future generations and to spread the word about this epidemic that is growing. And statistically, the numbers were showing that future generations were going to have larger experiences and greater experiences of osteoporosis than already existed. So I was looking at it from a pretty large standpoint, but the actual program, the Buff Bones system itself, was initially really just designed targeting people that were early postmenopausal women who were far more capable of doing many different types of movements, getting up and down from the ground, and more capable than doing simple seated exercises with weights in their hands. And that's really all that there was.

There was a huge gap that I felt a need to fill that was for these women who are, say, 40s to 60s that are— and now, you know, things have changed. My mom is 74 and she's part of that and she still gets up and down from the ground and she's part of this demographic that can do that, that is not elderly, that is not, quote, what you think of as the senior or fragile population. And yet these people don't want to be doing boot camps. They don't have the same needs. They're not trying to flatten their stomach. They need to be functional and they need to be strong. But we're doing them a disservice by saying, well, you either can go and do burpees or you can do exercises where you sit down and you tap your toes. So I realized there's, there's a huge population that is being underserved. And even though age-wise, chronologically, I didn't fit into that, I did in terms of what my body needed to be doing. So I created a system that felt good on my body. I was my guinea pig to test it. But then I tested it on a number of people and found that it served people very well and the results we were getting were pretty outstanding.

And so it's become something that's not just osteoporosis. So it's safe for anybody with osteoporosis and it's, the system is designed with bone loading approaches and yet it also integrates so much more with considerations of fascia research and also how we can release restrictions in the body and then build it from there once you've removed those restrictions so that then we build in the strength and how we bring in the mobility, the coordination. A huge component that I don't talk about with the public is motor control. So there's a lot that is built upon motor control in this. It's just the general public probably isn't as interested to hear about the sequencing as it comes into play for that. But as a result, it's been great for people with osteoporosis — excuse me — for people with osteoarthritis as well, and people with neck pain, and people with shoulder pain, back pain, hip pain, and especially the hypermobile folks, because what we're doing is we're releasing the areas where there's the fascial challenges so we can restore the gliding, and then you start to change the sensation, we change the proprioceptive feedback, and then we bring it all together. And then at the end is when we bring in some of the loading from outside forces, and then the body knows how to respond and it really integrates it as a whole.

So your hypermobility did not feel like it was being challenged while you were starting to do your strength training and everything. The work that you were doing actually felt good for your hypermobility and felt like it was helping you kind of rein it in and get control over it. Is that what I'm hearing?

Yes, although I still had to do it my way, essentially. And that was one of the beautiful things that Jeff and I created together was this technique, so to speak, of hands-on work, because I definitely needed the additional load and I definitely needed the additional resistance. I mean, that made such a difference for my body. But for me to do seated rows and lat pulls where my shoulder is not fully connected, I can feel it's not congruent, it— I wouldn't feel it, and I felt nothing in my posterior delt ever until I worked with him and basically told him where I needed his hands to give me the feedback so that I could get the joint congruent and I could get the joint stability. And then I could get the muscular activation where it needed to, but until we did it that way, it still wasn't enough for me. So I guess my answer is that weight training has been a game changer for me, but still today the joints are so lax that I still need the hands-on assistance that makes the difference so that I can actually get the proper loading forces and the proper activation where it needs to be.

That makes a lot of sense.

[33:12] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Very, very interesting. And I do— I think that this is a great concept because we talked about medications and the challenges with that. I think it's important to remember that when it comes to writing a prescription, which is basically, you know, when we give a plan to somebody, we are giving them a plan, we're writing them a prescription. Writing a prescription for exercise in the general sense is so much less useful than saying this is a specific program that you can do. And if we don't make it specific, then people don't follow through. Even when we do make it specific, it's easier to pop a pill or, you know, I mean, they obviously came up with things that you could have IV once every, I think, year or whatever. So I think that that's the other important thing that when it comes to writing that prescription, there's vast differences in terms of, you know, I hate, I know some people hate this word, but compliance. So I think it's great for people, when people understand the why, I think they're much more likely to actually do the how. And for you, you really understood it at a deeper level. So you were really motivated to actually follow through, right, with the exercise and everything.

[34:24] Rebekah Rotstein: It's true, and I think I hear you on the compliance term. But I think you're so right about that, that interestingly, when I was in New York in my practice, I had a prominent sports medicine physician who would refer patients to me, and two interesting things about that. Every single one of them that was referred to me, most every single one of them, the diagnosis was there's nothing wrong with them, they just need to strengthen. Almost every one of those people that I worked with that came under those circumstances passed the Beighton scoring. So usually the situation was that there was underlying hypermobility that was going on, and that's what we were really working with, getting them stronger, incorporating again some of the strength training concepts along with Pilates and other movement modalities.

But the other thing that's interesting is that many of the people who came to me were not compliant even with that when they were told by a physician that they had to come. It was the ones who actually stuck around more often than not were the ones who had found me on their own because their own volition, it was their own determination, not being told by an outside source that this is something you need to do. They had their own internal motivation that they were willing to do whatever they needed to do to get themselves out of pain. Or for instance, if it's an osteoporosis scenario, it's that the people who are, who are searching for me find me through a referral or through the internet because they are so determined they are going to take charge of their health. And that's the biggest factor I think of that whole compliance idea.

And with my trainer I would have him help me stabilize the joint in order to produce force because without that I wouldn't get the force production directly through the joint in the way that I needed to. So if we start thinking about the pathomechanics here, it becomes— to me it just becomes really evident that with those who are hypermobile you're not going to have the exact same force production distribution and transmission through a joint as ideally you would with the standard person or the standard patient. So that to me stands out as possibly the number one component, but I also think in terms of bone density and therefore possibly with vulnerability to fracture, the other part that stands out to me is that there's the collagen makeup and that actual component of what is comprising the bone, because most people always just think of bone as a skeleton, or they think of it as hard and stiff and calcium, forgetting about the collagenous component that gives it the resiliency so that a strong bone is resilient.

I like to say that one of the goals that I'm having with Buff Bones is to make strong bodies that are resilient. So it's not just that it's about strong bones, especially because with Buff Bones, we're not getting— technically, we're not getting enough loading force into the bones to truly make a big impact on osteogenesis and bone growth, right, and changes in bone density. Although clinically I've seen it, but technically we shouldn't really be. It's that we're preparing the body to then go do the other components of high-intensity progressive resistance training, velocity, these other things that evidence has shown on very high levels, even at 85% of your one rep max, you can be increasing your bone density in ways that they previously did not believe was possible.

So I first of all believe that Buff Bones is part of a bigger system, it's not everything, but at the same time it's also the idea that you're loading the bones, but you're also having to acknowledge that there is the chemical makeup and then there's the collagenous component. And so if there is a deficit or some kind of impairment in the collagen in people with, say, EDS, maybe with hypermobility spectrum disorders, then that makes sense that also the collagen that's a component of the bone makeup might be altered as well, and perhaps that it responds differently in its genetic aspects or even in the genotype, right?

So I think that it makes total sense to me, but the one thing I also want to quote you on, Linda, is I was listening to one of your past podcasts and you said something I love, which is that the exact label is not— and you're talking about hypermobility disorders and spectrums— that the exact label is not as important as the symptoms. I love that because I think that's a big factor as well when we're talking about osteoporosis. People freak out that they've been diagnosed with osteoporosis. It's not the same as being diagnosed with cancer. If you do nothing with cancer, then we know what can happen. I'm not saying you should just do nothing with osteoporosis, but osteoporosis is never a cause of death. It's pneumonia or blood clots that it can lead to from a fracture, especially in the elderly, that is the relationship to mortality.

And so people in the healthcare system are so concerned about osteoporosis with the elderly population because of that relationship to mortality, because of blood clots or pneumonia after you fracture a rib or fracture a hip and you're immobilized. But osteoporosis itself is not going to, quote, kill you, and many people live very, very long, healthy lives with osteoporosis and never even fracture.

And yet— and there's also another component, which is that osteoporosis was originally supposed to be diagnosed— the World Health Organization, let me rephrase that. Originally, the World Health Organization created its classification of osteoporosis based on low bone density as well as changes in an inability of the bone to self-repair itself, so changes in architecture. But for some reason, we're not looking at the secondary portion of that classification. We just look at low bone density. So as my original endocrinologist said to me, you are tiny, you are 5 feet tall and you weigh very little. I certainly weigh more than 82 pounds now, but look at the size of your wrists. You're not going to have much mass there. You are automatically going to be predisposed to having low bone mass because you have little bone mass. And so I think we have to keep that in mind.

I think that plays out for dancers certainly as well, that they're going to be small-boned. Ballet dancers are generally small-boned, and they're going to probably be predisposed to a classification even of osteoporosis based on having low bone mass. That doesn't necessarily mean that they're going to fracture. And I think that's an important thing that we all have to keep in mind for everybody, that it has to be considered, your bone mass, but let's, let's be careful with our labels as well.

[42:17] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That makes sense. And have you found a difference in how people that are hypermobile progress through the Buff Bones course, or how they respond to exercise as compared to people that are not hypermobile?

[42:31] Rebekah Rotstein: That's a really interesting question. I have not done enough of a clinical analysis to identify, but I would like to. I can tell you that, well, I think they actually respond differently. So here's the thing. I think that those who are hypermobile respond well because the— we're talking about usually women who are postmenopausal who are coming to our classes or who are coming to me as clients because of osteoporosis. Not always, I have some premenopausal. But if we look at that subset, then I would say we generally know that with hypermobility, most people tend to become a little bit stiffer as they get older. So especially as the Beighton scoring has shifted that at certain ages it lowers with their scoring. I think it's at 4, is the number of their scoring after age 50, and 5 is the number of joints that have to be classified prior to that, that people are getting stiffer.

As they're getting stiffer, they're also having more of the fascial restrictions and the tightening that is occurring, also trigger points and such. So I think that the release work that occurs early on in the program benefits them, and the motor control benefits them, so that then when they add the load on later and they're doing more full-body integration, it makes sense in their bodies. Not necessarily in their heads cerebrally, but their bodies automatically are saying, "Ooh, okay, wait, I'm getting this. I'm starting to congeal." I would say that those who are not hypermobile are still benefiting from the stretch components and the fascial release work that they're having issues with regardless because they're just stiff and tight. So I don't know that I'd say there's that much of a difference because I do find that both benefit from it, but maybe it's that they benefit in different ways.

[44:36] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So, so how did you discover also things like nutrition and other forms of intervention? How did you find experts to help you with that? Because we know that exercise is a hugely important component, but there's other factors that are important as well in terms of treating, you know, for bone health.

[44:56] Rebekah Rotstein: Well, the answer is that I'm still in the process. I've worked with various nutritionists, and I have also had colleagues in the field that I've referred to. It can be an interesting topic, though, because that is one also that is constantly shifting and constantly changing. And so the discussion about vitamin K now is now the new vitamin D. Right. And then—

[45:27] Dr. Linda Bluestein: You and I have talked about that.

[45:28] Rebekah Rotstein: Yes, we have. And I'm fascinated with vitamin K. And yet I also don't talk about it much myself because people like my father, who was on Coumadin for much of his life, it would have been totally contraindicated for. And so I never, without, it's A, it's out of my scope, and B, I'm not doing a full medical intake to be qualified to tell people whether they should be taking certain vitamins or not. But I do find it challenging because sometimes people come back to me after I've referred them to a nutritionist where they appreciate what the person said or they don't appreciate what the person said or they don't like the path that that person took them on, or maybe it was that they had to go into so many supplements. I find it to be a really tricky road, partly because there's differing beliefs as well. And some of those beliefs are evidence-based and some of them are not evidence-based, and I don't— I'm not always so thrilled with some of the things that I see that are evidence-based because I feel that they do overlook other components. But then the ones that are less evidence-based, you want to be careful of what you're aligning yourself with. But at the same time, there are things that seem to have some evidence, but it's not enough to warrant physicians backing it, or certain standard physicians backing what they're saying. So it, in some ways, it parallels what I find in the exercise world, that sometimes maybe you're just ahead of the curve, right? That maybe as a nutritionist or as a movement professional, the reason that there's no evidence is that it just hasn't been shown yet. But at the same time, you don't want to be a whack job. You want to be out there reporting stuff that is valid. So I find it's a really tough balance.

[47:29] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, definitely. And it's funny, I didn't even make the association until you just were answering this question between something that was happening in our household recently. My husband had a stress fracture and nobody had advised him about vitamin D or any other— I mean, they just said, don't— So they put him on crutches and he had some complications with that and yeah. And so, and no one had discussed diet or anything. Again, that's time-consuming and yeah, you're right. It's challenging. Are you an early adopter? Are you a late adopter? Are you somewhere in the middle? And to me, it's all about the risk. So you're right. For someone like your dad who was on Coumadin, then obviously eating a lot of dark leafy greens, which are high in the K vitamins, you know, is dangerous because then you're going to negate the effects of the Coumadin. But otherwise, a lot of the nutritional-type advice is stuff that you can be an earlier adopter on because the risks are less.

But it can be really challenging to find somebody that has the expertise and can provide that additional information because I really do feel like no matter how great the pill or supplement is, that you still need a good quality diet. It's not going to make up completely for a poor diet or other things like smoking. Right? So I mean, in terms of bone health, smoking is definitely not something that's beneficial. Which, of course, dancers, at least— I don't know. I know the other day I tried to look for a more recent study, and I couldn't find one. I don't know if either of you two ladies know anything about more recent statistics with smoking and dancers. It used to be, I know, a really common thing because of weight probably, but is that still the case, do you think, or is that something that's really shifted?

[49:29] Rebekah Rotstein: I don't see it as much now, and I work mostly with pre-professionals, but even with the professionals I work with, none of them smoke and they don't talk about that. I encounter a few dancers who smoke. I know one male dancer who smokes and he works as a freelance dancer. And so I've actually heard a few of his dance partners say, "Oh, he smokes," and they can kind of tell. And I think that it's changed. I think that it's become more of a stigma than a stimulant. I know when I was dancing, there were so many dancers that said, you know, "My lunch is a Tab and a cigarette." Right, right. Both of which are not good for bone density, right? But that was just kind of the way it was, but I think it's a lot different now, and hopefully everybody listening knows you shouldn't smoke, right, for so many different reasons, but for the purpose of this conversation, you shouldn't smoke because of bone density issues, right? So, right, right, right.

[50:27] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's our little PSA, and I'm sorry that I digress. No, no, I got off on the stress fracture thing, which of course is not, you know, that's just bone health in general. And as you pointed out, Rebekah, very early on, I think so many people think of bone as being static and it's not, right? It's how fast are we building bone and how fast are we breaking down bone? Because just like every other tissue in our body, we're constantly growing cells and destroying cells. So it's a question of the balance of those two.

[51:02] Rebekah Rotstein: Well, but the digression about stress fracture is actually, I think, really germane to the conversation because so many of my dancers get stress fractures or they get stress reactions in their feet and in their shins, and we have to talk through what's causing this, right? And look at the exercises they're doing or not doing. But then it's also a great time to say, have you been to your doctor? Say to the parents, has your kid ever had blood work done? Have you looked at vitamin D? Let's examine your diet. And the dancers who commit to a healthier diet and commit to trying to use nutrition as well will see, hopefully, that they don't get more stress fractures and also recover faster than if someone just said, hey, here's a boot, sit in that for 6 weeks and don't do anything else. So just like osteoporosis, dancers deal with stress fractures, and the way that you deal with it will greatly affect the outcome, right? Just like with osteoporosis, if you sit on the couch, you will have different results than if you start moving and try to do a system like Buff Bones. If dancers sit on the couch while they're stress fractured, they will have different results than if they move with a doctor's supervision and look at their nutrition.

Well, there's two parts that are really interesting about that, is that the stress fracture actually could be a sign of osteoporosis. And even outside the dancer population, when somebody premenopausal gets a fracture that seems unusual, maybe a stress fracture, but also just any kind of fracture, like somebody that I know that was skiing, she was skiing and she fell and she fractured her arm. And the doctor wisely said, you know, let's do a DEXA, let's do a bone density scan. And sure enough, it came back as osteoporosis. And it wasn't the first of the fractures that she had.

The other interesting thing that you mentioned, Jen, and I think is something that Linda as a physician would find intriguing, is that how often have we had— let's maybe outside of the dancer population— how often have we had clients who have experienced a fracture from something, and let's not talk about— well, maybe it could even be the spine. But let's say you fracture your ankle or a wrist, right? Being the third most common site for postmenopausal women due to osteoporosis. And they're told by their physician, well, you're supposed to not do any exercise for 6 to 8 weeks. And I'm like, well, what does your wrist have to do with all the ankle work that we're doing that's going to help you balance? Right. This piecemeal approach.

The reason I say different for dancers is that as a dancer, you know, this idea that you have to be bedridden or inactive for 6 to 8 weeks is hell. For the average person, they might take it as a reward. So, you know, your clients that are dancers are probably much more eager to say, Jen, well, give me something I can do. Right. I find that in my non-dancer population, it's trying to convince them that no, you really should have this conversation with your physician to ask them that this is not a free ticket to inactivity. Are there things that, you know, can we get permission to do some other things? Because I also want the clearance of the physician.

[54:29] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, and the difference between what we provide in terms of written instructions versus verbal and how clear we are and what people actually can recall. Because it's also possible that the doctor didn't say do nothing for 6 weeks, but they interpreted it that way because that's what they want to hear, you know, or because the physician didn't say, well, because your wrist is broken, you need to have that immobilized, but you still can do a whole bunch of other things including walking and, you know. So I just, that came to mind as you were talking about that.

And speaking of seeing a doctor, Rebekah, if you're working with someone and maybe they came to you independently, as you mentioned, they didn't come to you because a doctor suggested that they come to you, but you're working with them independently and you're thinking maybe they should see a physician or somebody about their bone density issues, at what point do you encourage them to do that?

[55:30] Rebekah Rotstein: Well, the reason they've come to me for their bones though, and would— well, let's put it this way. The reason that somebody would have come to me for their bones was because they got a diagnosis, and the only way they would have gotten the diagnosis is because they saw the doctor.

[55:48] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

[55:48] Rebekah Rotstein: So they would have come to me because of the medical side to begin with.

[55:53] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure.

[55:54] Rebekah Rotstein: I still, even in those cases, I still always tell them, all right, you got this diagnosis, but one of the first things you do— well, the first question they always ask me is, should I take medication? The first thing I always tell them is that I'm not going to give you an answer on that, right? But the second thing I then tell them is, in order to make a decision on that, which is a decision between you and your family and your doctor, you need to get more information. And so I tell them that they want to see an endocrinologist or a rheumatologist so that they can get the proper blood workup and identify, is there any other underlying cause? Do you have a thyroid disorder? Are you hyperparathyroid perhaps? I had a client where that was the case. She went and got her parathyroid tested and it turned out it was hyperactive, which was leading to unusual bone breakdown, because that's what regulates the osteoclast activity. So by that, she was able to control her osteoporosis by controlling the parathyroid. So it was actually a really wonderful thing that she discovered some other underlying condition.

And that often is the case with osteoporosis too, that it's really just an indicator of something else that is going on. And erroneously, you're having this homeostatic effect in the body because there's something else that's not functioning properly. So that's just not the case, and sometimes it's just idiopathic osteoporosis where we just don't know why this is happening, and that's sometimes the case for younger people as well. But even now after all this discussion, it makes me wonder, well, that whole idiopathic thing, maybe there's something going on with the connective tissue disorder that we thought was of unknown origin, but there is something that is there. But I do send clients or patient referrals right back to another specialist to at least rule out any other conditions that might be the cause of unusual bone breakdown. And then we take it from there.

Okay. So— sorry. So let me follow up with that then. So if you were still doing a private practice because you have, you know, you're still a Pilates teacher and you work with some non-osteoporosis clients, is there a client that you might work with that wasn't sent from a doctor or a friend that you run into of your mother's or something like that? What are some things that might lead you to tell someone like that, an old friend from dance school, hey, maybe you should go get your bone density checked out?

Definitely. A couple things. The signs and symptoms, including if they have— well, first of all, if they've experienced one or more fractures and what we call a fragility fracture, meaning a fracture that is not because you were standing on a chair changing a light bulb and fell off, but a fracture that has occurred from standing height or from a seated height that should not be occurring in normal healthy bone. So, if you've had one or more fragility fractures, if you have lost height, and if there is a clear sign of kyphosis or excess curvature, roundedness in the spine. Sometimes, so, a symptom of, say, a fracture, a vertebral fracture of the spine could be pain, but that can be so misinterpreted because the pain could be from anything. But also likewise, that loss of height could be from just degenerative disc disease as many people get when they get older. But certainly the— if somebody has lost height, if they are a certain age, if they have experienced any fractures to begin with, that's a deal breaker for me to say you should go get your DEXA checked.

And again, I'm talking about not just a stress fracture in the foot, although that could be it, but also if they've— if they fell and fractured an ankle or if they fell and fractured their wrist. And I would say also, you know, the guidelines, the medical guidelines have shifted considerably in the last decade as well. From saying over 65, women over 65 should be getting a DEXA, to then starting to depending, it's altered on different guidelines. So some have stated, well, if you have had a DEXA and it's fine, then you do not need to get another one for 10 years. And then the question becomes, well, 10 years is a really long time. At what point, what age did you get the first DEXA? Because you lose up to 20% of your bone mass in the first 5 to 7 years after menopause. So I also look at that when I'm talking to somebody. All right, well, what is their age right now? Are they in that large bone loss period immediately after menopause, or are they far out where it's probably leveled off? Where they're probably not losing so much in such a dramatic fashion.

So I do tell people to get a DEXA though if they've experienced a fracture. And I am a proponent of the DEXA. Some people are not. I do believe in at least having a baseline measurement because when people come to me and they are showing me one single DEXA, I'm like, okay, well, that's fine. I don't know if the reason your bone density is low is because it's just low to begin with. What's really helpful is that now if I have two, I can compare one to another. Now I can see, are you low, or are you low and you're dropping from the last time you had your DEXA?

So I'm a proponent of it and an advocate of it to at least have some kind of measurement and have a baseline. Not to— it's not the end-all be-all. And I also use the FRAX score. I have them use the FRAX score, which is another measurement. It's an algorithm basically that was developed by the University of Sheffield in the UK, where it looks at all these different factors from your age, your bone density, or your last T-score, DEXA from your hip, secondary osteoporosis, history of smoking, history of glucocorticosteroids, like if you're on prednisone at some point, especially those like with Crohn's or colitis, and alcohol units per day. And I was just doing this with a client the other day, going through it with her so that she could ask her doctor about it, who wants her to go on medication. I was like, that's your decision, but talk to your doctor about the FRAX because it gives you a 10-year probability fracture risk.

Well, guess what's missing from this algorithm? Have you ever exercised? Do you have an exercise history? How's your balance? Right? So to me, there's again a fault in the system because I really have a lot of trouble believing that your dancer, or your, say, your patient or client who is now 60 years old, but either A, was a professional dancer, or B, just was an avid mover and did quite a bit of movement training throughout her life and has excellent balance, has the exact same fracture risk of the other patient, Patient P, who has been sedentary most of her life, whose balance testing or any kind of balance assessment would come out very poorly. Do you really— do they have the exact same probability of fracture? Well, according to this algorithm, yes, they do. Again, that's so interesting in our system, I think.

[1:04:04] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That is very interesting.

[1:04:05] Rebekah Rotstein: Went off on a tangent, but there are so many different things that I think can be considered. It also comes into play with the work that you do, Jen, specifically with your training, whether they are a dancer or not, that even if they have osteoporosis, that balance training and all the proprioceptive work will make a difference in their fall reduction. I mean, evidence totally shows that. And evidence also shows that if you fall less, you are less likely to fracture. Isn't that the goal of all this to begin with? Preach.

[1:04:47] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. And Rebekah, we know that you've presented to doctors and hospitals around the world. And how has the medical community reacted in general to your approach? And how have you pulled together so much research to inform your system?

[1:05:05] Rebekah Rotstein: Wow, several questions. I'll start with the last one, which is, I mean, that initial literature review back in, I think it was 2008, was really the genesis of everything for Buff Bones. And then I just, I look at, and I update our instructor training manual every year as well with the latest research studies. I should mention that we have an instructor training program, a certification for exercise professionals. So I update that yearly with the latest research, and I look at it as well just to see, you know, obviously there's limitations to how much you can constantly see everything that's coming out.

But in terms of the medical world, you know, it's, it's an interesting one because I think there are some in the medical world who really don't care because what they're looking at is just purely the evidence that is out there. And there is evidence out there, especially in the last 5 years or so. There's a growing body of evidence on high-intensity progressive resistance training, especially adding in some impact as well, that is having some really, really promising results. So either they don't want to see it, or they do acknowledge it and they do encourage that, but the challenge becomes so many in that same population also have arthritis. So they get concerned about how are we going to do heavy loading for people that already have pain in their joints? Isn't it going to add more compression? And part of the answer to that is, well, it depends on how you do it. And that's where Buff Bones comes in, is that we really prepare the bones and the joints to be smart so that you can, you can move in a smart, intelligent fashion, so that you can get those extra forces in so that the body does know how to absorb and transmit those loads.

The other answer is that sometimes physicians will say, well, actually, we love this idea, right? They're not concerned about it. So it just, I think it depends. I remember I was presenting at an international osteoporosis conference once, and I was presenting the latest research for what was going on with exercise. And there was a physician who was moderating this, who really questioned what I was saying, and I'm saying, this is not my beliefs, I'm telling you what the research is showing right now. So sometimes you have the physicians questioning it because it just doesn't seem possible. Sometimes you have physicians who are embracing it but are still going to say, yes, but you need medication. And I think maybe there are some physicians that might say, well, we will be able to hold off.

I know that my mom's physician has honored her request in the last couple years to hold off on one of the medications so that she can see what the weight training will do. And in fact, the weight training did increase her bone density. Now granted, that was prior to COVID and her having COVID and all the gyms closing down. Right. That happens now. And I actually do think this is a frightening time for the osteoporosis world with COVID because so many people who were active and going to gyms are no longer doing that. And that's why I've been trying to bring in more and created the online studio in the meantime so that people have an option of something they can do at home.

I'd say it just depends on the physicians, and that's why I am so happy to know physicians such as yourself, Linda, who come from a background of movement, and this is one of the things that has really become very clear to me in the past couple years, that the greatest advocates that I'm going to have for this work are physicians who understand personally the importance of movement and exercise for themselves. Because I've realized that I can talk till I'm blue in the face to a physician who I can think of plenty that I think are wonderful human beings, but the idea of actually going to a gym or the idea of taking a movement class would make them laugh. They like their sedentary lifestyle, and that's fine, but that's not gonna be my advocate because they don't believe it for themselves, why would they possibly advocate that for their patients?

So my alliance is going to be with physicians who believe in movement because they understand it and they embrace it themselves. Or maybe they haven't, but they've seen the effects that it can have on their wife or their husband or their parent. And then that becomes the game changer that makes them a convert to the gospel that the three of us are trying to spread.

[1:10:18] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And that's the ironic thing. If you could take all the benefits of exercise and put them into a pill, it would be the best-selling pill ever, you know? But, yeah, it is very interesting. And there is data actually in osteoarthritis as well that muscle strengthening improves pain and improves function. And it makes sense— excuse me— it can be challenging to figure out what kind of exercises that person can do. But the muscle protects the joint. So it's not like you have to, you don't choose either or, right? So it is kind of ironic, but as Jen and I have figured out, we just keep converting the easier to convert. And, you know, the people who are gonna be at the very tail end, we don't worry about them quite yet.

[1:11:09] Rebekah Rotstein: You know, I'm always surprised how many of our conversations, how many of our podcasts come back to the basics of nutrition and exercise and sleep. I remember it was Dr. Ruhoy, I think, right? We were talking to our neurologist. We were talking about how to heal the brain holistically. And she listed out these 3 things and those 3 things, she was like, these are the 3 non-negotiables I work on. And they were get better sleep, clean up your gut, like watch what you eat and how you diet, like heal that, and get exercise. I mean, every single person that we talk to, every expert in their field, one of those three things at least is talked about as this is what you got to do. And it feels so silly that we keep saying this over and over again. Diet, exercise, and sleep. That's what it is.

I find this is— I've been doing a lot of thinking lately this year about hurdles. And one of the things that comes to me exactly about what you're referring to is how can we change the mindset? How do we change this paradigm so that it's not, oh, well, I have to change my diet. I have to get more sleep. I have to exercise. And that's been part of what I've been working on with the Bites program that I have, of how it's just a 5-minute-a-day subscription. What is the least amount of time to let you realize that it's not something you have to do, that actually brushing your teeth doesn't just keep your cavities away, brushing your teeth actually makes your breath smell better, right? Like, 5 minutes a day of exercise doesn't just make you adhere to what you're supposed to do from your doctor to keep your joints mobile. It's that, wow, I actually feel better. Well, my attitude is more positive. Well, I can actually more easily tackle every other component of my life when I've done this. So how could we possibly do that with everything, changing all of this, the triad of sleep, movement, and nutrition, to things that are more joyous. So it's like, oh no, I don't have to cook my own meal now. Ooh, I get to create and produce something that I have cooked. Yes, yes, preach.

[1:13:52] Dr. Linda Bluestein: It's all in the attitude, for sure, for sure. So Rebekah, we definitely know that, as we were just saying, for sure exercise and ideally some kind of program where you are getting really informed advice and really being able to do the proper type of exercise to help you achieve the goal that you are looking to achieve, you know, is really ideal for everyone. Is there any point at which you encourage a person not to exercise?

[1:14:26] Rebekah Rotstein: No.

[1:14:27] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, that was quick.

[1:14:30] Rebekah Rotstein: I feel because two things— I always say, do you notice I always have two things? I can't answer succinctly. I feel that part of it is that we— I like to use the word sometimes exercise, but just sometimes movement, because sometimes exercise is misconstrued even by the medical community when they're saying, oh, you know, you just had surgery, you're not allowed to exercise, as we were saying, for such and such number of weeks. Well, sure, you had surgery, but maybe you can just breathe, and maybe you can just move your arm. Maybe you're doing like a somatic type of movement, or you're doing something that is not affecting the area of concern. So even just movement, I would say no, there's not really an instance.

Now, certain types of exercise, certain types of movement, absolutely there are times that I say it's not appropriate. But there's always— I really do believe there's always something that somebody can do. And just as we were saying before, it goes back into that mindset and it goes back into the idea of self-efficacy. That if you are told that you're not allowed to do anything, I know from my experience that has been some of the worst times for me emotionally, when I was told, oh, you know, you are on a very restricted diet, you cannot eat blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, because we're trying to assess certain things with a health situation. Or when I've been told, even just the initial diagnosis of osteoporosis, you know, you are not to bend your back anymore. Great, that feels awesome. So the idea of being told that of things, just not to do things, I think creates a very negative cyclical pattern and negative mindset. Very, very dangerous.

And so I always feel that there is something that somebody can do. So I can't think of any scenario where I say no, because even if you're just doing finger exercises, and then here you can see, you know, my bendy fingers.

[1:16:46] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh yes, look at that!

[1:16:47] Rebekah Rotstein: There's always something that you can do, and how we define it as exercise or movement might be part of it, but there's always something that you can do. Now do I say that you should just do any exercise? No. That there's very specific things, and there's specific things that we shouldn't do based on what might be happening in our bodies at certain times. But that's all the more reason to do the 568,000 other things that you can do.

[1:17:19] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, and I love the movement as opposed to exercise concept, because if we want to be able to move, then we need to move, right? So, but I think we often don't think of it in those terms. We've covered so many great and interesting things, and this has been really educational for sure for me. And is there anything else that we didn't ask you that you wanted to be sure to cover?

[1:17:45] Rebekah Rotstein: Hmm. Something that I think is interesting is the discussion of instability that comes up a lot in the movement world. And this might not be relevant for everything here, but the movement and Pilates world especially has become very focused on this term stability, and we want to help stability, and we want to fight instability, when really the majority of the population doesn't need to worry about stability. Stability and instability of a joint. In your population, in your world, that is a huge focus. Personally, that's part of your world, as a viewer, let's say, that is a huge focus. But I think we need in the movement world to stop talking about focusing on joint stability, and I used to talk about it all the time too. Worries about instability, because all we're doing is creating more fear when most people really don't have to worry about that. They need to move more, focus more on mobility, and even in your hypermobile world, we can still talk about where you find your mobility from, that it's just not in your TL junction. Or it's not just hanging out on that Y ligament, that we're even finding stability from a different part so that we work in this integrated fashion.

I've become really indoctrinated, if you will, into the world of biotensegrity and the idea of how the body is a self-sustaining structure that is inherently stable unto itself. Absent, let's say, of maybe Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome, hypermobile condition, and that when we move and we work in a way that leverages the biotensegrity of the body, that takes on the natural compression and tension components that are inherently there, and allows the body to work as a systematic unit, where one part affects the other part, that inherent stability is automatically found, and we can start moving away from worrying about stability or instability, again, absent from the population that you're focused on. Where there is very valid concern about joint instability, but how do we stabilize certain areas through movement and how do we embrace all of that to move away from some of the fear-based discussion of movement that I know was a very big part of my life for a long time.

[1:20:51] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Fantastic. And can you let us know, where can people best find you and learn more about what you're doing?

[1:20:58] Rebekah Rotstein: So my website is— the name of the brand is Buff Bones, and the website is buff-bones.com. And I also have a product or an online studio that you can find through there if you search. We have to make it clear, it's called Revive. And, but you can also find that if you search there on the website when you're looking for the classes. And you can also just find us on Instagram as well as Facebook. So, Got Buff Bones is the name on Instagram, and on Facebook it is just Buff Bones. And the Buff Bites, that 5-minute-a-day subscription is also findable through there.

[1:21:55] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Fabulous, and we will also have links to all of that on the website as well.

[1:22:01] Rebekah Rotstein: I should mention also, sorry, I forgot. Also, I have my own work that I do that is separate from Buff Bones, that is just my integrated movement and emphasis on biotensegrity and such, is on my personal Instagram called Rebekah Rotstein. So I actually do do the things that might be also more of interest to the dancer population through there, because I also teach a class every Tuesday that is for dancers and movement professionals.

[1:22:36] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, very good. Great. Well, we'll have to point everyone in the right direction, but we will do that through the show notes and the website, and so people can check all of that out. So, well, fabulous. Well, it's been so great chatting with you today, Rebekah. And you all have been listening to Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD. Today we have been speaking with Rebekah Rotstein, creator of the medically endorsed Buff Bones System, industry leader in Pilates, bone health, and movement education. And it's been so great to chat with you, Rebekah. Thank you so much for taking the time to talk to us and share your knowledge.

[1:23:13] Rebekah Rotstein: Thank you both for inviting me to speak with you, and also just for all that you're doing for the world of dance and the world of hypermobile populations and for bendy bodies. I wish that I had you guys 20 years ago. So do we.

[1:23:34] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's, that's part of why we're doing this. We wish that we had us back 20 years ago. So we're trying to do what we wish we had back then, right, Jen?

[1:23:44] Rebekah Rotstein: Yes, ma'am.

[1:23:48] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So, well, great. Well, it's been, it's been fun. It was great seeing you, Jen, and we'll catch you next time on Bendy Bodies.

Thank you for joining us for this episode of Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD, where we explore the intersection of health and hypermobility for dancers and other artistic athletes. Please leave us a review on your favorite podcast player. Remember to subscribe so you won't miss future episodes. Be sure to subscribe to the Bendy Bodies YouTube channel as well. Thank you for helping us spread the word about hypermobility and associated conditions. Visit our website www.bendybodies.org for more information.

For a limited time, you could win an autographed copy of the popular textbook Disjointed: Navigating the Diagnosis and Management of Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome and Hypermobility Spectrum Disorders just by sharing what you love about the Bendy Bodies Podcast. On Instagram, tag us @bendy_bodies, and on Facebook at Bendy Bodies Podcast.

The thoughts and opinions expressed on this podcast are solely of the co-hosts and their guests. They do not necessarily represent the views and opinions of any organization. The thoughts and opinions do not constitute medical advice and should not be used in any legal capacity whatsoever. This podcast is intended for general education only and does not constitute medical advice. Your own individual situation may vary. Do not make any changes without first seeking your own individual care from your physician. We'll catch you next time on the Bendy Bodies Podcast.
