---
num: 31
title: '31. Allowing Imperfection with Bonnie Robson, MD'
date: '2021-04-08'
duration: 1h 1m
description: >-
 A very high percentage of dancers and athletic artists struggle with
 perfectionism: it’s what makes us so good at what we do, while at the same
 time can be unhealthy for us as individuals.

 Bonnie Robson, world-renowned psychiatrist and dance medicine specialist, is
 back to talk to us about perfectionism in the arts world. She defines
 perfectionism, and explores the duality of perfectionism and anxiety. Bonnie
 discusses the difference between positive and negative perfectionism, and
 warns of the danger of the “I should” syndrome.

 Bonnie shares techniques to get rid of negative thoughts and looks at
 performance STRIVINGS versus performance CONCERNS. She discusses the variables
 that differentiate between adaptive and maladaptive perfectionism, and how
 unhealthy competition actually decreases creativity.

 We look at how the pursuit of perfection can increase stress, which
 contributes to social anxiety, eating disorder, and suicidal thoughts. Bonnie
 offers tips for training and setting reasonable goals, and shares tools for
 parents to recognize stress and anxiety in their young artists. As Bonnie
 reminds everyone who strives for perfection, “It’s ok to say that’s good
 enough”.

 This episode is a must-listen for parents, artists, studio owners, and dance
 medicine professionals working with artists on a regular basis.

 Link to "Brain structure and joint hypermobility: relevance to the expression
 of psychiatric symptoms" article mentioned in the episode:

 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3365276/

 #anxiety #mentalhealth #selflove #bodypositivity #mentalhealthawareness
 #disorderedeating #perfectionism #depression #perfectionist
 #ehlersdanlossyndromes #selfcare #mcas #healthcoach #movementismedicine
 #healthyliving #pots #inspiration #motivation #perfection #berealnotperfect
 #certifiedhealthcoach #IADMS #danceanxiety #mentalhealthfordancers
 #BendyBodies #BendyBodiesPodcast #jennifermilner #bodiesinmotion
 #balletwhisperer #hypermobilitymd
tags:
 - POTS
 - MCAS
 - Mental Health
 - Exercise
 - Neurology
 - Hypermobility
audioUrl: >-
 https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH7146819250.mp3?updated=1721670518
videoUrl: 'https://youtu.be/jA-uAb10enI'
snippets: []
guests:
 - 'Bonnie Robson, MD'
guestImages: []
---
[00:35] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Hello and welcome to Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD, where we explore the intersection of health and hypermobility for dancers and other artistic athletes. This is Jennifer Milner here with co-host Dr. Linda Bluestein. Before we introduce today's guest, we'd like to first remind you about how you can help us help you. First, subscribe to the Bendy Bodies podcast and leave us a review. This is helpful for raising awareness about hypermobility and associated disorders. Second, share the Bendy Bodies Podcast with your friends, family, and providers. We really appreciate you helping us grow our audience in order to make a meaningful difference. This podcast is for you. Today we are so fortunate to be chatting with psychiatrist and performing arts medicine specialist Dr. Bonnie Robson. Bonnie has served as a consultant to numerous ballet schools and companies. Has performed original arts-related research and is a popular invited speaker at national and international conferences across the globe. Her mindfulness approach to performance and psychological skills training programs have been included in the curricula of numerous universities and postgraduate arts programs. In addition to serving on the editorial board for the journal Medical Problems of Performing Artists, Bonnie has served on numerous committees and boards. Including the PAMA Board of Directors, the IADAMS Education Committee, Healthy Dancer Canada Membership Committee, and the Dance USA Task Force on Dancer Health. Bonnie has received numerous awards for her contribution to arts education, including a Lifetime Achievement and the Bill Dawson Award. We spoke with Bonnie previously on what has been our most played episode to date, Episode 10, Cultivating Psychological Skills. Today we are speaking with Bonnie about perfectionism. Hello, Bonnie, and welcome to Bendy Bodies.

[02:38] Bonnie Robson, MD: Thank you so much. I'm really pleased to be here.

[02:42] Dr. Linda Bluestein: We're thrilled to get to talk to you. Yes. So, Bonnie, let's start with some definitions. What is perfectionism? Is it a personality trait? Is it a psychological attitude? What are we talking about?

[02:56] Bonnie Robson, MD: Yeah, perfectionism is what we're going to address today and hopefully leave with a better understanding. It can be described as a pursuit of excellence or the search for perfection itself. Dancers tend to be perfectionistic, so that's why we're talking about it. So do individuals who have perfectionistic traits select dance training because of its exacting standards, or do people who study dance learn to set higher and higher goals for themselves or demand more of themselves?

Another way we think of perfectionism is learning to be self-critical, often employing self-talk. And then there's the multi-dimensional model that can be a combination of 3 types of perfectionism. And it's the self-oriented perfectionism, the other-oriented, and the socially prescribed. So that's a lot of confusion, but the self-oriented one is the classic one where you worry and I'm going to get it right. And you make excessive demands on yourself.

The other oriented, the dancer sets standards for those around her. This is interesting. She says they aren't doing well enough. That teacher should be clearer. She's not counting right. And so how can I possibly meet the standards when others are not meeting them? And the socially prescribed, in which the dancer experiences intense pressure from all those around her to live up to their ideals. I couldn't face my mother if I don't do well. The dancer believes that those other people hold those ideals and tries to live up to them.

[04:49] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I've never heard it broken down into 3 different descriptions like that. And then the people around them, and then trying to live up to other expectations. But that's such a clear image. And I know that people with hypermobility and hypermobility disorders tend to suffer— we have higher numbers of anxiety and perfectionism and OCD, which is why Linda and I wanted to have this conversation. So we are so grateful that you are having this conversation with us because that describes me at various stages of my life. All three of those describe me at various stages of my life. I think that's something that a lot of people can relate to. But especially it seems not just me as a person, but as a dancer. It seems like dancers definitely tend towards perfectionism, whether it's perfectionists gravitate towards dance or dance makes us into perfectionism. It's hard to know which one it is there. Or which one came first, but are there any, are there any gender differences? Is it— do you see perfectionism more in men than in women, or women than men, or is it kind of equal?

[05:56] Bonnie Robson, MD: Yes, there's that. And I just want to pick up on your idea that perfectionism in dance— we're going to explore more of that. And you talked about anxiety. Think about perfectionism and think how closely linked they are to anxiety. And then we'll explore that duality. And you're right, female dancers are more perfectionistic than males, and more than other artists, both students and professionals, except for perhaps some musicians who are very perfectionistic in their individual pursuit of excellence. And there female dancers are even more perfectionistic than athletes.

I think of gymnasts who have to do those turns. so yes, there is a gender difference.

[06:50] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Interesting. And I wonder what attracts us to dance, because Jen, I was thinking the same thing, that yeah, that can describe me, you know, and as a dancer being drawn to dance because of those exacting standards, but then that may be making us expressing that trait even more in that environment. So chicken and egg, but then also like, you know, causing it to be even more exaggerated because of the environment that we're in.

There's also something very comforting about those boundaries and about those impossibly high standards. At least there was for me as a dancer to say, oh my gosh, I'm gonna have to try to achieve this, this, and this. It was almost comforting just to be able to see that and to know I've got this uphill climb, but I see what— I see those expectations so clearly laid out. So while we understand that a lot of times it's negative, there was some comfort to that for me as well, to have that there.

[07:47] Bonnie Robson, MD: Yeah, definitely. And about anxiety, I heard one teacher say, you always— and you feel good— you always come back to the studio. It's safe in the studio. And so that's where you get the comfort. You know what the next movement practices do not have a predictable pattern to the class, but ballet has a predictable pattern. You know what's coming next, usually, and that's comforting.

[07:12] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's interesting.

[08:16] Bonnie Robson, MD: So the routine, you know, you always start with pliés and tendus and left hand on the barre.

[08:22] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And yeah, as you're saying that, I feel like I'm going back to my childhood and I can picture that comfort of returning to home. I mean, it was really a second home for me. So that's really interesting.

[08:33] Bonnie Robson, MD: So the perfectionism trait can be negative, of course, but is it ever a good thing? Is there anything wrong with setting high standards or trying for, you know, the perfect arabesque, for example? As with many things, a little can be a great thing. For example, I was thinking of music on the radio. And you hear a song, oh, that's the one I like. And you turn the volume up a little bit. Oh, and it feels good. And I'm going down the road. Oh, I'll have some more. And I'm really enjoying it now. And then I'll turn it up just a little. Ooh, ooh, that's unpleasant. And a little bit more. It's really uncomfortable. Turn it up even more. And the ENT specialists tell us you're going to have tinnitus and you risk deafness. And certainly the musicians have to be very aware of that, that they don't suffer an early deafness because of a high volume. So that happens in dance with perfectionism as well. That's just an illustration, but you think of an inverted U or a little mountain here. And as you start out in dance, using the U principle or the Yerkes-Dodson principle, we sometimes think, and you're seeking high standards. You said you got focused and you get concentrating and you try and do better and you actually feel better and it's progressing and it's better and better and better until you do that perfect pirouette. You are so pleased. I can try just a little harder. I'll just throw a little more energy into it. And what happens? Bunk. So you increase to the peak performance, and after that, there's deterioration and fall-off in the performance.

[10:22] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's very interesting.

[10:24] Bonnie Robson, MD: So is there such a thing as good perfectionism then, or bad perfectionism? And how can we tell the difference between the two? Yeah, so you're absolutely right. There's good perfectionism, and those of us in psychology like to talk about it as positive normal fixation facilitating. The dancer, just as you've described, has pleasure in going to the studio and trying to re— maybe today is the day I'll get my splits. I've waited, I've worked at it. The goal of having a trait encourages a dancer to be organized, on time, warmed up, and focused, and teachers love that. So, but there's also negative perfectionism, as you expected, and we call that neurotic, debilitating, or maladaptive. It's an all-or-none attitude. Either you're perfect or you're not. And the person tends to devalue their accomplishment, and focus on what they have yet to achieve rather than see, I'm approaching getting a perfect pirouette. I'm approaching so much better. I'm not falling over. I'm actually balancing. This is great. Oh, I didn't make it yet. Oh, I'm such a slob. When am I going to get this? Everybody else has got it.

Or they have an I should syndrome. I should do better. I should have been less tense. I should have been brighter. And I bet you've got some examples of the I should person. Can you think of somebody that this has affected negatively?

[12:05] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely. I was just thinking about that. When I work with dancers, a lot of the times you see them deal with the shoulds rather than the accomplishments. And for me, it's— this is definitely not like the medical definition of it, but for me, it's whether or not your perfectionism is personal or sort of a clinical tool that you use. Like you described, you can have that perfectionism that brings you up to this point, and then you're— it's not personal, so you can step away from it. Just yesterday, actually, I was working with a lovely dancer who's at a quite high level, and she was working on some famous pirouettes from the Black Swan variation. And it's quite complex going into this second piece of the pirouettes, and she and I were working on it together. And she said, you know, I can't get it. I have this, this, and this. And we worked on it together. And she got to this point where it was almost quite there. And then we did it again. And she did it again. And it was beautiful. And she just sailed through it and the look of satisfaction on her face. And I said, do you want to do it again? She goes, no, I'm good. And I was like, look at that. It was such a healthy way. She didn't get frustrated. She didn't get angry when she was working through it. She just tried it again and she fixed it, something else. And that's, to me, is that sort of impersonal perfectionism that you— she could use that as a tool and then set it aside.

And for so many dancers, that sense of, I didn't get it and I'm getting frustrated and I should do it again until I do get it and it does get perfect. And of course, the more that you try to do it, the more that you push yourself and don't look at your own personal warning signs that you're getting frustrated, impatient, that you're starting to throw yourself through it, that you're not being careful physically. It's become personal and you can't stop until you feel like you've achieved it. Then even if they achieve that, they say, I should do it again. Or a whole different I should is, I'm exhausted, but I should go run my variation because everybody says you should run it 3 times a day so that you're strong enough for whatever competition is happening. You should run it 3 times in a row. I should do this, and they feel like they're less than. And it gets to the point where they're not even less than as a dancer, but they're less than as a person to themselves. And I think that's what you're talking about.

[14:28] Bonnie Robson, MD: Yes. Yeah. Thank you. That's that, you know, it's— you go on to say it's so the I should leads to I'm guilty. I didn't do enough. I should have done 3, I only did 2, I let the team down, I'm ashamed, I have trouble making decisions. It's sort of a negative self-talk or troubling thoughts that are there. And I liked you said that they make it personal rather than, that's so important, we must think about that. These negative thoughts that sneak in and when you're not when we're not paying attention, they can be relieved by mindfulness practice and training. But I have to say that mindfulness training takes— everybody's talking about it, but it takes a long time to learn it. It's another thought process movement thing, and it isn't something you can learn overnight. So it requires group sessions. So I propose for now a faster temporary solution. It's not that you need a long-term solution, but let's use thought stopping for these nasty thoughts. A technique to get rid of the thoughts is recognize you've got them. Ooh. And then to wash it out, even using a gesture like this can help. Toss it away. Have a little shower, a little mini shower. Yell out loud. I love being in my car when the thoughts come because then I can say really loud and nobody can hear me. So then the negative thoughts are gone and that's great, but I've got this space left. So if I don't fill it up, the other negative thoughts will come jump in. Oh, look, space.

[16:29] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Boom.

[16:30] Bonnie Robson, MD: And so I need to fill this up with positive thoughts right away. This is a hard skill to learn. It takes practice to take the negative thought and turn it into a positive. Oh, look, I haven't got that routine yet. Well, just a minute. If I take it and break it down a little bit more, I need to break it down even more. Maybe I can spend some— I have some time tonight because none of us ever have any time, and dancers have no time at all. Their agendas are crossed over and calendars are things on top of things. So if I spend some time tonight, or I focus on how my teacher's been helping me and follow what she's been saying to do well, she's rooting for me. I might even write that on a card like this kind of a card and put it up on my mirror. My teacher is rooting for me. She believes I can do this, or she wouldn't have asked me on a variation, that card on your mirror can help build self-confidence. She believes in me. She knows I can do it. I can do it.

A further difference has been added by Shannon Norden-Bates in terms of the positive and the negative. They talk about performance strivings and performance concerns. Strivings are the pursuit of high standards that we've noticed. Concerns worry about performance fears and evaluation. You're always feeling that little camera up here watching you. Oh, look, she did it wrong again. Oh, look, she isn't standing up. Oh, look, her shoulders are hunched. Oh, look. It's an observing ego, but it's a negative one. And it reacts a lot to imperfections.

[18:31] Dr. Linda Bluestein: You know what struck me about what you said just at the beginning of this topic about being in your car and being able to say things loudly to sort of combat those negative thoughts? I know this sounds crazy, but a lot of dancers, especially in the pre-professional and in the younger age, don't realize that they have thoughts. They don't hear, they're not comfortable or used to hearing their own voices. We as dancers, we feel voiceless. We're not supposed to speak up in class, you're not supposed to argue with your director, we don't have that voice. Some of it is just becoming comfortable with figuring out what you personally are thinking. And when you hear those voices in your head, is that what you think or is that what your director has said or is that what your parents have said? And learning to recognize, are those negative thoughts my negative thoughts or like, is that really what I think? And learning to just hear your own voice. It can be revolutionary, I think, for a lot of dancers.

[19:35] Bonnie Robson, MD: I think that's so true.

[19:43] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I remember I was definitely well into adulthood when I realized I am not my thoughts. Like, I can think something, but that doesn't mean that that's what I believe. And it is kind of an interesting thing that we're not taught as we're growing up.

[19:53] Bonnie Robson, MD: So I'm really glad that you pointed that out, Jen, because, right, we can think a very bad thought, for example, but that doesn't mean that we believe it to be true or that we actually want that. We can separate ourselves from that.

That's super interesting.

[20:07] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So Bonnie, can you talk a little bit more about the variables that steer a dancer into either adaptive or maladaptive perfection, what the differences are, what we should be looking for, and what the factors are outside the dancer that can affect how they choose to strive for success?

[20:25] Bonnie Robson, MD: Well, Linda, both you and Jennifer, dancers, have already alluded to this. The first variable that makes good— differentiates between good and bad perfectionism is the dance culture itself. The culture demands an ideal body. The culture demands flexibility, and those of you out there in the Bendy Bodies group know about this. It demands turnout. Now, it's not so much now, but dancers work to achieve a certain body, an aesthetic, stamina, strength. Gradually, this culture is easing up these standards, but they— there's no doubt they were there. Dance education employs self-scrutiny. Just what you're saying. I have to think of my thoughts. I have to think of this. I have to think what I'm doing. Since the millennium, there's been attention to the motivational climate in dance education, which is wonderful, and we're all rooting for that. And it's had a significant impact on how much perfectionism we're seeing. Further, it is known that the social environment where mistakes are noted and outstanding performance is valued, that sets the stage for negative perfectionism and the linked anxiety I talked about, anxiety about performance. So they're very closely aligned there. It's the culture. Jen, what do you think?

[22:01] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, I think yes to all of that, of course. I was saying something to Linda earlier in a text conversation about the culture, just looking back even to when dance was so supremely glorified, you know, and thinking about every little girl wanted to watch The Red Shoes and wanted to to be in the red shoes and wanted to be the woman in the red shoes, which is kind of sick now you think about that, because she is in an abusive relationship both personally and professionally with the director of the ballet company, and she literally dances herself to death to please him, right? And yet we were all like, oh, that's amazing, she's so lucky. She's dedicated. Right, right. And then just even moving forward, Linda, you had mentioned Center Stage, you know, the movie Center Stage, which aimed to take a healthier look at it and to kind of try to shine a little light into it. I thought that Black Swan, the movie with Natalie Portman, did a good job of sort of showing some of the reality of it, but also that the reality of it is not healthy, right? That they were saying, hey, this is not healthy, this is not normal. They weren't trying to glorify it. At least they weren't trying to glorify where she was emotionally and mentally. But just so much of our culture, so many of the TV shows, the reality TV shows with the— that follow different studios, even if they don't intend to, kids sit down and watch that and they see if you're watching a TV show about a big dance studio and they're consistently casting the kids who have the most flexibility, or who are the most assertive and dominant in the dressing room, or who stay after every day and, and come early every day, even when they shouldn't, when they should be going home and resting, who push through the pain, if those are the ones that are getting cast the most and getting all the plum roles and getting pushed up front, then the little girls and boys who are watching those TV shows at home are going to go, oh, that's what I have to do. That's what I should be doing. Even if their own studio isn't like that, their own studio could be lovely, but they see so much of it in that culture. They see so much of it on social media that it's really hard to avoid getting those messages these days, even if your personal studio is trying its best to approach it in a healthy way. I think that's a really good point.

[24:26] Bonnie Robson, MD: And I think reality, I like to use air quotes for reality because reality TV, but it blurs the— especially for the young, super young impressionable dancer, or, you know, any other type of reality TV show, it kind of blurs the line between reality and entertainment. And with social media and everything, can definitely increase those challenges. So there are some other factors, Linda. They're extrinsic factors outside the self. One artistic director said to me, it's all about casting, you know. From the very first Nutcracker, everybody wants to be Clara, and some people hold on to it for years that they never got to be Clara, and so they're not quite good enough. And Clara is often chosen simply because she has long hair and fits the costume, but as students— students don't know that. As students grow older, they're likely to experience more competition, however, in their own school because they're getting better and they're staying. Then in the summer intensive, more competition. At larger competitive competitions or conventions such as YAGP, students— and again, you're watching online to see how these people live and they even do backstage what they're feeling. Unhealthy competition can promote perfectionistic attitudes. And interestingly enough, in turn, that decreases creativity. Teachers report the groups that used to have fun and really enjoyed traveling to the competition can instantly turn and become self-critical faced with superior competitors. Their teachers say they just fall apart. And the teachers are looking to us in terms of psychological skills that these students can, can take and learn from so that they can get rid of this unhealthy rivalry.

[24:26] Shannon and Bates looked at two types of learning environment: the task-oriented, in a kind of climate that promotes individual learning and everybody is of equal value. It's cooperative and collaborative, and students are encouraged to set their own intentions. I love that, Jennifer, when your students said, that's enough, I've done it, that's my goal for today. And long-term goals, how they're going to get to the gala, the exams, the audition. And we'll talk a bit about that later, but to stay with this type of learning, the second type of learning is ego-involving, a climate that's often seen in elite conservatories. It promotes negative comparisons. The teacher may ask for somebody to demonstrate and to show how to do it, or worse, the teacher may ask somebody to demonstrate, to point out the negatives. And equally demeaning, and I've seen this happening in some, particularly Irish dancing lately, everybody gets a trophy no matter what. They get some sort of award. And that's very demeaning. In many elite conservatories, competition is just accepted. Apprentices are competing to get into the company. This culture may extend as far as rivalry between teachers to have more winning students. And in that kind of environment, it's easy for students to shift from task-focused to outcome-focused. And I wonder if you've seen this in a studio, Jen, or in your experience people have reported this and moved from one studio to another because of this kind of—

[28:28] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely. I mean, I see a lot of it, most of which I won't talk about in public, but I think that it's it's there even in the best schools. There's that little bit of ego, you know, and it's so hard to, to let go of that. The healthiest schools that I see are the ones that say, if a dancer is injured, I've seen some schools say, well, can you just get through Nutcracker? And I've seen other schools say, hey, there's going to be other Nutcrackers, you get healthy. And, and not realizing the ones who are asking them to just sort of put push through Nutcracker, not realizing the implications of what they're saying, right? But sort of putting that burden unintentionally on the child to make their Nutcracker look better or to help them get through what they're trying to get through. Or if you see— I know a school, not one that I work with regularly, but a school that had several years ago a dancer with a very clear eating disorder. And several of the dancers had said, "We're concerned, we're worried about it," and the school said, "Oh yes, so are we," and then yet turned around and, and had her be sort of their, their face of their company at their comp— it was a competition studio— face their company at their competitions, you know, that kind of thing. And so they would say one thing, but then clearly something else was happening because they thought, "Well, sure, that's unhealthy, but also she looks so good, let's put her forward and let's put it out there, you know. And the dancer— that was 10 years ago— the dancer is healthy now, and it was a healthy outcome for it. But it's so hard for those studios to not say, oh, but— I mean, I know, but— and to put our egos on that back shelf, you know. I'm just as guilty of it. I want to see my dancers do well, and I want to have them get out there and be successful and amazing. But the ego-driven studios, the ego-driven companies, the places where you can see that the director is starting to get that little bit of a god complex and casting capriciously and making clear examples of bringing up a 16-year-old through the ranks and then casting her in principal roles to say, I can do whatever I want, and that poor girl has to live with the social pain that comes with that when the rest of the company has to deal with it. You definitely see that. I do think that especially over the past year, with all of the mental health issues that are coming to the forefront in dance, I do think that's starting to be addressed. I think dancers are starting to get that voice and to start to see just because the director wants to make me do this or just because my teachers are pushing me to do this, Maybe that's not the best. I do see that the task-driven is starting to become more prevalent, I think. Hopefully, as dancers find their voices, it will continue to be that way. As dance studios and dance teachers let go, there's another one of my soapboxes, is they let go of saying, well, this is the way it's always been, or this is how it was done to me, so they should have to go through this too. I didn't get to use gel pads in my pointe shoes, so neither should they. I suffered with lamb's wool. Well, great. They didn't have gel pads then, right? So learning to let go of that and see what's important for the kids, I think is so important and so valuable.

[32:02] Bonnie Robson, MD: If you— I was waiting to see if Linda had an example she was burning to share, but if not, I'd like to share one. This year I met a wonderful teacher named Kim McCaddo of Elevated Dance Project in Idaho. And I have to share her name because of the wonderful innovation she and her co-director Melissa Larson have brought. They're looking at teaching life lessons through dance rather than the other way around, such as healthy lifestyle, community awareness, self-compassion. These are all things we'd want to share with children of 9, 10, 11, 12, respect for others. They focus on these themes throughout the whole year. They work on building confidence, learning responsibility, compassion and kindness, and respect. I love this. They actively encourage everyone around them, including their competitors. So their dancers will often line up when the competitors come off stage and high-five them as they go by. So this kind of attitude— they also learn task analysis and goal setting, just like you said, that's enough for today. I just thought that that's— we're beginning to see studios like that that are saying, we're not here to turn, we're here to, to learn.

[33:26] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, absolutely.

[33:27] Bonnie Robson, MD: That reminds me of a saying that I heard the other day, and I might not get it exactly correct, but it's easier to raise healthy children than to fix broken adults. And, you know, so many of these dance educators, studio owners, you know, do have this opportunity to really have a huge impression on young people. And so I think that's so fabulous, Bonnie, that example that you shared.

[33:53] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's really great. Oh, wonderful what they're doing.

[33:57] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So, so we've talked about perfectionism, we've talked about the stress that comes with that, and then what is the relationship sort of between perfectionism and stress and anxiety and how those all fit together?

[34:10] Bonnie Robson, MD: Yep, so you've brought it just where we're going. Stress is related to anxiety, so the pursuit of perfection can be a crucial part of stress, developing that stress bubble. Stress puts a dancer at risk for injury, mental disorder including depression, and even suicide. Anxiety, and anxiety around dance leads to eating disorders or reduced energy availability. Further, perfectionism is related to social anxiety, not just anxiety, and social anxiety in psychiatry we think of as stage fright, as performance anxiety, that people actually cannot go to what they— to the place where they're going to perform. They can't concentrate, they're distracted, and so naturally they— if they do go, they have a poorer performance than they could give.

[35:18] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's really important because we know that people who have hypermobility are at greatly increased risk of anxiety.

[35:24] Bonnie Robson, MD: At least most of the studies show that, like, some 8 to 16 times increased risk of anxiety. And there was even a study back in 2012 in the British Journal of Psychiatry that showed differences in key emotion processing brain regions, including increased volume of the amygdala.

[35:43] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And so there's a lot of really interesting research out there on hypermobility and different conditions, like even obsessive-compulsive disorder and ADHD, attention problems and things like that.

[35:58] Bonnie Robson, MD: So this is a super, super important topic for the hypermobile population.

[36:05] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

[36:05] Bonnie Robson, MD: And as you say, the amygdala is way down in the bottom in here. And it's the emotional center, but it fires off information up to this prefrontal region, which is your judgment, your planning, your organization. Woo. They all go out the window. If you get too wrapped up.

[36:25] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So that's where the thought stopping is probably really important to do sooner rather than later, because once you, I'm so glad that you're talking about the stress because stress is also a huge activator of mast cells and causes degranulation of mast cells. And once you get that, and then you get the release of cortisol and all the other physiologic things that happen in the body once we're under stress, it's harder to stop it, right?

[36:49] Bonnie Robson, MD: So if we learn to stop those thoughts earlier, rather than later when there's all these physiologic things happening in the body that are—

[36:57] Dr. Linda Bluestein: it's biology, it's not, you know, judging ourselves harshly that, oh, we should be able to stop this.

[37:02] Bonnie Robson, MD: But if we can recognize those thoughts earlier, I think that's probably a really key strategy that people can use. Linda, is there a podcast that tells us more about that so we can hear more about that at another time? About which aspect of it? About the mast cells and the physiology of the, of the anxiety and, and, and the stress.

[37:02] Dr. Linda Bluestein: There's a fantastic journal article that talks about that that I can put a link to in the show notes, and I happen to know the author quite well, so maybe Jen and I can see if we can get an interview with that person also. Maybe there will be a podcast.

[37:44] Bonnie Robson, MD: Yes, yes, that would be nice. Yeah, it's a really challenging thing because these conditions are often not recognized for so long. People go to these appointments and they're told—

[37:54] Dr. Linda Bluestein: they're basically told that they're crazy. Well, what does that do? That just increases your stress level, which is part of the problem in the first place. So it, it really creates this vicious cycle.

[38:05] Bonnie Robson, MD: And, and we also know that people that are hypermobile have increased interoception, so we have increased awareness of what's going on inside of our body. So as these things are happening, we're more and more aware, whereas people who are not hypermobile are— they're kind of oblivious. You know, sometimes I feel like I can feel every single cell as it's moving through my body, and my husband, he's— he'll be bleeding from something and he has no clue. Honey, you're bleeding.

[38:30] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, am I?

[38:31] Bonnie Robson, MD: You know, so, so I think that, I—

[38:35] Dr. Linda Bluestein: yeah, we'll have to—

[38:36] Bonnie Robson, MD: we'll have to make sure that we have an episode specifically about that because it is an important— so important to remember that our bodies can, can sometimes be enemies. They can fight back. But, but I was going to go on to talk a little bit about something you can do in terms of preventing this perfectionism getting in the way of a poor performance. And that is the task analysis that, that the teachers at the Elevated Dance Project in Idaho were doing training as little as 10 minutes or half an hour a month, not every day, 10 minutes a month can get— can help you set reasonable goals, task analysis. And we've, we've done the research, significantly improve the performance. Once the goals are set, a dancer can plan, can use time management. If a dancer has a featured role or is to perform a solo in the spring, the earlier she is cast, the better. She needs to plan. If she's nervous, she may procrastinate. Very risky, but very tempting. Well, I'll do it later. No, no, no, no. If she breaks it down now and is able to accomplish the elements, then she can work on the feelings and emotions. She doesn't have to add in all those other, spend time with the worry, spend time with the negative thoughts. So now we're talking about outcome goals and process goals. So process goals are the ones she's going to set up. They're much more effective than outcome goals. Outcome goals is I'm going to dance a perfect performance. But process goals help to maximize performance. And they're possible and they're within the dancer's control. So we use a little acronym called SMART. And so they're specific, they're manageable, they're achievable, they're not unrealistic. I can't do 32 French fouettés tomorrow night. That's not never going to happen. They're relevant to what you want, and you have a target date to finish. So that's the smart way to proceed with task analysis.

[41:06] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's great.

[41:08] Bonnie Robson, MD: And, and what about parents? How can they recognize that their child is stressed and anxious? And what, what can they do about that?

[41:08] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes. Okay. Ballet parents. Again, you can have good ballet parents and bad ballet parents, and not all parents who are concerned about their kids or come to ask about things, from, from the staff are negative parents or pushy parents. Sometimes they're genuinely concerned that this dance culture is bringing out some things, some traits in their children that they're not sure are healthy. So for the parents, if you're looking at your, your dancer who seems to be overworried, is that— are they constantly seeking reassurance? Are they so overworried that you can't help them calm down? They can't say, oh yes, I remember, I'm going to be okay. Yes. Are they really afraid of the performance? Would they rather give up the chance? Most dancers I know, even though they're very nervous, may be nervous about the performance, they they still want it. They realize that this is an opportunity. They want to be out there. That's what they're working for. They want to be on stage. Right now, we're talking at a time of the COVID pandemic, and many dancers do not have the opportunity to be on the stage. Well, I've been talking to some of the dancers as they go back and have performed again, and the euphoria they feel in returning is so wonderful. So a dancer who doesn't want to perform is unusual. A dancer who would give up an opportunity to perform, that's unusual. For parents, are they so tense that when they walk into a room other people recognize it? Their aunt or uncle says, what's, what's wrong with Martha today? She seems very tense. They also have difficulty sleeping. Now all athletes have trouble sleeping before an event, and, and that's been documented. But we're talking about real trouble sleep. They can't, they can't get to sleep, then they get to sleep, they have early waking, they can't get back to sleep. so a performance psychologist or counselor can often help sort this out for you. and so parents may want to ask about that from the studio. Some studios have a counselor on their wellness team. And what the counselor can also help the parents with is recommending if, if a more intensive management of the anxiety needs to be sought rather than working through and psychological skills training, do you need a medical referral? As you said, Linda, and I want to call you Dr. Linda at this point, we mustn't forget the physiology. And as much as we might be trying, there may be something that physiologically might need to be done.

There's another variable that I'd like to talk about, and that's about individual child development, or what we call ontology, the growing up. A man named Dean Nelski notes that much early reinforcement for outstanding performance leads to performance anxiety, to perfectionism and to performance becoming the basis of your self-esteem. Applause is love. So the little dancer does the first recital and gets flowers, and grandma comes, and everybody's excited, and it's wonderful, and, and so on. And, and as the dancer progresses, she's better, and she gets better roles, and public came, and she goes to a competition, gets a scholarship, and something— but then one day there's some critical notes and the whole thing falls apart. Why? Because she had based her whole self on her ability to dance. She didn't have other things. So it's very important that dancers, and parents acknowledge that dancers not be just uniformly dancers. And I think about A Chorus Line and the main dancer saying, "I am a dancer, all I need is the music." That was her life, that was it. So a dancer like that only feels accepted if she's doing well. If she has a down part, her self-esteem falls off. It's dependent on other people's view of her, not her own view of what she's enjoying. Did you have a good time? Did you enjoy it?

I don't know, Linda, but do you have any examples of that where the dancer be— that's it, that's what she is, and she has— if she has to think of a future career, there's nothing else?

[41:08] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh my gosh, do I ever. So when I was dancing and started having— getting injured, my entire identity was wrapped up in dance. So when I was 16, 17, and, you know, wasn't able to dance. I remember going to, I would still go to class because at that time, you know, you're supposed to still go and watch. And I would just sit there and cry through the entire thing. And I would just cry at home and I didn't know what I was if I couldn't dance. So, you know, that was a difficult phase to go through and figuring out if I can't be a dancer, then what am I gonna do with my life? So, yeah, I definitely personally can completely relate to that. And so I think as much as we can have different parts of our identity that, you know, I also love to learn new things and I love animals and, you know, now I'm a mom and a wife and, you know, all these different aspects of myself besides dance. So I think that's really helpful. And those of us in dance medicine are so grateful that you didn't continue dancing or teaching, that you're here to help us understand some of the aspects of medicine. It's wonderful.

I think that's one of the funny lessons in life, is that sometimes some of the worst things that happen to us, can later be things that we grow from, that we can really, you know, they talk about post-traumatic stress disorder, of course, but post-traumatic growth.

[47:38] Bonnie Robson, MD: So both, both then and when I wasn't able to work anymore as an anesthesiologist, that was pretty devastating to my self-esteem. I went through a really difficult phase, you know, then also.

[47:50] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And little did I know then that I would be doing this and able to reach so many more people. So, yeah, it's sometimes things in life turn out very differently than what we, than what we expect, but that's where keeping an open mind is super important in broadening our horizons.

[47:50] Bonnie Robson, MD: Absolutely. A lot of times when I work with my pre-professional dancers, you know, you chat while you're working out. And I will always ask them, maybe our second or third session, if you weren't dancing, what would you be doing? Or what do you think you would want to do when you're finished with your dance career? Not saying if you don't make it or if you get injured, but saying what would you— and there's always, The dancers who go, you know what, I really love architecture, or I think I would want to, and they've already thought about that. They have a whole personality outside of dance, even though they may be pursuing it quite passionately. And they're the ones who get that deer-in-the-headlights look like, why did you just say that? That freaks me out. I can't even think about that. I don't want to think about that. And those are the ones that we're going to have some long conversations. But you see that those very distinct distinct personalities there. And I think that, I think that the perfectionism can be in both of them, but as we said, it's either personal or it's impersonal. And you see that distinct difference.

What, what if though, Bonnie, what if the perfectionism is in the parents? So we've talked about parents helping their kids with stress and anxiety, but what if the parents are the perfectionists and how does that rub off on the pre-professional dancer?

[49:22] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Very dangerous. It can actually embed the perfectionism in, in the child who's got some perfectionistic traits. And the parent says, oh, that's good, that's good, that's good, right? Why don't you take notes from what your teacher says? I'll get your pad and pencil. So, and while that might be in many things I'm recommending journaling and taking notes, in this instance where it's an example where the parent is pushing and concerned. And of course, we want parents who are concerned, who are going to make sure that their children don't end up with a problem because they're pushing too much.

I think psychoanalytic theory comes in here a little bit, where the dancer becomes— has— uses perfectionism as a defense against feeling defective or inadequate. And so in both of those instances where the parent is pushing too much, where the child is saying, I'm, I'm not okay, I've got to be more perfectionistic, otherwise I'm useless, I'm nothing, I'm no good. so then they set unrealistic goals and they prove their own point. You can't make that goal. So, yes, you are you are inadequate at that because you've just set an unrealistic goal. So helping the parents to see that too.

Often in situations where I see a child who's anxious, I will ask, I'll say, are you the most anxious worrywart in the family? Are you the worrywart? And no, I'm not the worrywart, my mom is the worrywart, or my brother is the worrywart. And then we have a little talk in the family about where did all this worry come from. And it can be generational right back. And then that usually requires some work with an expert around family therapy and helping the family readjust their goals.

And that's really interesting because being around anxious people makes us more anxious, right?

[51:36] Bonnie Robson, MD: That, that energy.

[51:37] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And since there's a hereditary component to both anxiety and hypermobility, it's—

[51:43] Bonnie Robson, MD: it makes sense that that would be something that would be present more in families.

[51:48] Dr. Linda Bluestein: There's one other thing that has come out in the research that I might want to just tuck away, for teachers, that, perfectionists tend to get discouraged quite some— some group of them, when they don't meet the standards they've set, and they tend to drop out. Very talented young people will say, I'm so awful, I just quit, and they're just gone. So rather than saying I'm useless, and they say, I'm not going to have any more to do with that, I'm done, I'm done with soccer, I'm done with hockey, I'm done with dance. So one has to be aware of that if particularly studio teachers, if you don't want to see dropouts of the people that you thought were— had good potential.

[52:36] Bonnie Robson, MD: Yep. Well, I remember very clearly myself, I hated working on fouetté turns because I wasn't good at them, and I would rather not do them than to do them and not be good at them. And so I, I remember being 14, and my best friend would say, hey, let's stay after in the studio and work on fouetté turns. And I'm like, no, no, you can go ahead, you can stay and work. And she would go in there and she'd look terrible and she'd fall and she didn't care and she'd get up and she just kept practicing and practicing. And I just, I didn't want people to see me less than perfect. And so I didn't want to work through that sloppy, messy phase. And so I was never amazing at fouetté turns. I mean, I could knock them out barely, but it was never something fantastic. And that's, those are the things that I look back and regret. I regret not allowing myself to fail and not allowing myself to try things that I knew I wouldn't be good at. And not giving myself that grace. That— those are the things that I think my perfectionism kept me from, and kept me from developing entirely different skill sets, maybe, in dance.

[53:37] Bonnie Robson, MD: But you know, you do— you are talking about mastery. You've mastered the turns enough so that you are confident enough that you can stay in the profession and do them, and if needed, I mean, mastery is so related to getting yourself up to the point where you say, I can do this. I have enough energy. I feel I can do this. And that's what you're talking about. I wish I'd had more energy to say, take a chance, try it. You know, nobody's going to see me. I'm going to fall over, but there's me in the mirror, you know. So take a chance. See if this would work. See if that would work. So, and so getting yourself aroused enough for the performance, for the audition, for the exam is very important, and that takes practice. And that might be a whole other session that we talk about, about arousal and energy, and how to build enough energy. but it is, it is a body sensation, and it's crucial to practice. So, while dancers are it's not enough to just plan and organize. You have to try. You have to give yourself a chance. I love this. There is a new kind of thought coming out through self-compassion, and many teachers are saying before a class, give yourself this class with self-compassion. Allow yourself to make mistakes, to try things, to be good enough. I love the good enough. So if you walk away from today saying, I was good enough, I stayed through that whole thing. I was a little bored and I wanted to leave, but I stayed and I got to the end to where she said I was good enough. You're good enough. So I have just one little thing that I'd like to— and I thank you so much for letting me talk on like this, but I like to share one little anonymous saying that I I came across lately, like the one Linda came across, and on— it was the voice she'd heard. mine is on a dream written down with a date becomes a goal. A goal broken down into steps becomes a plan, and a plan backed by action, taking a chance, makes dreams come true. You will master that task and move on to the next one. That's sort of— I love that when I found that.

[56:13] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That is so great. I'll have to get you to email that to me. I love that. Well, Bonnie, it sounds like if I'm going to do a really crude 60-second summary of all of this, it sounds like we are acknowledging that there is perfectionism out there, right? And that the one of the first things we have to do as artists is acknowledge that if that's something that we are wrestling with and maybe being able to start and recognize and form our own thoughts and choose what thoughts we have and try to take control of not having the negative thoughts and filling it with positive thoughts instead. And being able to say, are those my thoughts? Are those someone else's thoughts? And then trying to train our brain to help alleviate stress as you talk about doing the training and sort of learning to not take failure personally. That if we fail on that turn, that's okay. As you said, it's okay to be good enough and it's okay to say that was good enough and I tried and failed and that's okay. Is that a fair summary?

[56:13] Bonnie Robson, MD: Great.

[57:23] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I think we'll all take the image of your dancer saying, that's enough. I did what I came to do today. I don't have to take on a whole new set. That's enough.

[57:35] Bonnie Robson, MD: Being able to walk away. That's so hard. And as, and as parents, because there'll be different ages of people listening to this.

[57:43] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So for anyone that's a parent, I think it's so important, Bonnie, what you were saying about if we have that perfectionistic attitude as a parent, how that can impact the child, because you know, we all love our children and we want them to be—

[57:56] Bonnie Robson, MD: we want to raise them well, but sometimes we don't realize the things that we're doing that are detrimental until, until later when they're a lot older.

[58:04] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So I think that's really, really helpful for parents, especially parents of young children.

[58:09] Bonnie Robson, MD: Yeah, absolutely.

[58:11] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, well, well, this has been so great to chat with you today, Bonnie, and we would just so appreciate you coming on again and chatting with us about this super, super important topic, perfectionism.

[58:24] Bonnie Robson, MD: Yes, thank you, Bonnie, so much again.

[58:26] Dr. Linda Bluestein: You're welcome. And, and that's what it was. It was a chat of our sharing our, our thoughts, and so that's why it was so great. Thank you for having me.

[58:35] Bonnie Robson, MD: Of course, anytime. And you all have been listening to Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD.

[58:41] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Today we have been speaking with Dr. Bonnie Robson, psychiatrist and performing arts medicine specialist. Bonnie, thank you again so very much for taking the time to come on the Bendy Bodies podcast today and sharing your expertise with us.

[58:53] Bonnie Robson, MD: Thank you. Thank you for joining us for this episode of Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD, where we explore the intersection of health and hypermobility for dancers and other artistic athletes.

[59:05] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Please leave us a review on your favorite podcast player.

[59:08] Bonnie Robson, MD: Remember to subscribe so you won't miss future episodes.

[59:12] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Be sure to subscribe to the Bendy Bodies YouTube channel as well. Thank you for helping us spread the word about hypermobility and associated conditions.

[59:20] Bonnie Robson, MD: Visit our website www.bendybodies.org for more information. For a limited time, you could win an autographed copy of the popular textbook Disjointed: Navigating the Diagnosis and Management of Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome and Hypermobility Spectrum Disorders just by sharing what you love about the Bendy Bodies Podcast. On Instagram, tag us @bendy_bodies, and on Facebook at Bendy Bodies Podcast. The thoughts and opinions expressed on this podcast are solely of the co-hosts and their guests. They do not necessarily represent the views and opinions of any organization. The thoughts and opinions do not constitute medical advice and should not be used in any legal capacity whatsoever.

[1:00:07] Dr. Linda Bluestein: This podcast is intended for general education only and does not constitute medical advice.

[1:00:12] Bonnie Robson, MD: Your own individual situation may vary. Do not make any changes without first seeking your own individual care from your physician. We'll catch you next time on the Bendy Bodies Podcast.
