---
num: 34
title: '34. Highlighting GI Disorders with Leonard Weinstock, M.D.'
date: '2021-05-27'
duration: 52m
description: "Are you suffering from gastrointestinal distress? People with hypermobility disorders have a higher prevalence of GI problems than the general population.\_\nDr. Leonard Weinstock, board-certified gastroenterologist with expertise in Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes (EDS) and related disorders, sits down with Bendy Bodies to discuss this very topic. Dr. Weinstock discusses the “unhappy triad\" of EDS, postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS), and mast cell activation syndrome (MCAS) and how MCAS may actually be at the heart of EDS. He lists ways to be evaluated for GI disorders and speculates that 10-17% of the general population may have undiagnosed MCAS. He stresses the importance of a multi-disciplinary approach to treatment and thinking outside the box.\_\nWe look at gastroparesis and small bowel intestinal overgrowth (SIBO) and their links to hEDS and hypermobility spectrum disorder (HSD), and Dr. Weinstock outlines the prevalence of median arcuate ligament syndrome (MALS) in people with MCAS or POTS. He elaborates on his prescribing practices with low-dose naltrexone (LDN) to help increase endorphin production and reduce inflammation, and lists vitamins and diet changes that can be effective in people with MCAS.\_\nAs one of the authors of \"Covid-19 hyperinflammation and post-Covid-19 illness may be rooted in mast cell activation syndrome\", Dr. Weinstock discusses the possible link between long-COVID 19 illness and MCAS. And finally, he shares suggestions on what to do if you’re having difficulty finding a GI specialist who understands complicated disorders like EDS and MCAS.\_\nFor anyone dealing with GI issues, as well as physicians looking to understand the connection between hypermobility and GI disorders, this is a timely and important podcast.\_\nhttps://www.gidoctor.net/provider/leonard-weinstock-md https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32328892/ https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32920235/ https://www.researchgate.net/publication/338327834_Perioperative_Care_in_Patients_with_Ehlers_Danlos_Syndromes\_\n#Podcast #LeonardWeinstockMD #GIdisorders #EDS #zebrastrong #MCAS #MALS #POTS #SIBO #hEDS #autoimmunedisorders #BendyBodies #BendyBodiespodcast #hypermobilitymd #lindabluesteinmd #jennifermilner #bodiesinmotion #balletwhisperer #hypermobility #mastcelldisease #mastcelldisorder #EhlersDanlos #EDSAwarenessMonth"
tags:
  - EDS
  - POTS
  - MCAS
  - Nutrition
  - Diagnosis
  - Treatment
  - Hypermobility
  - Research
audioUrl: >-
  https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH7613254565.mp3?updated=1721670564
videoUrl: 'https://youtu.be/eGicTEIeB_M'
snippets: []
guests:
  - 'Leonard Weinstock, M.D'
guestImages: []
---
[00:08] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Hello and welcome to Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD, where we explore the intersection of health and hypermobility for dancers and other artistic athletes. This is Jennifer Milner here with co-host Dr. Linda Bluestein. Before we introduce today's guest, we'd like first to remind you about how you can help us help you. First, subscribe to the Bendy Bodies Podcast and leave us a review. This is helpful for raising awareness about hypermobility and associated disorders. Second, share the Bendy Bodies Podcast with your friends, family, and providers. We really appreciate you helping us grow our audience in order to make a meaningful difference. This podcast is for you. Our very special guest today is Dr. Leonard B. Weinstock. Board-certified gastroenterologist and president of Specialists in Gastroenterology and Advanced Endoscopy Center. Dr. Weinstock is an associate professor of clinical medicine and surgery at Washington University School of Medicine. He is a primary investigator at the Sundance Research Center and the St. Louis Pain Clinic. Dr. Weinstock has published more than 135 articles, abstracts, editorials, book chapters, and poster presentations at national meetings. He is currently researching the role of mast cell activation syndrome, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, restless leg syndrome, and the inflammatory condition rosacea. Dr. Weinstock, thank you so much for joining us today.

[02:25] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: My pleasure.

[02:27] Dr. Linda Bluestein: How did you come to develop a special interest in hypermobility disorders and MCAS?

[02:33] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Well, it's a rabbit hole, as they say. Once you start figuring things out, you go deeper and deeper and more things become clear, and then you more— and then you get wrapped up in them. I would say that each situation with the EDS and MCAS came from two particular patients who wound up becoming case reports. Each of them opened my eyes to things that I never learned in medical school, GI fellowship, residency, even in practice. So I discovered them on my own, in part by learning, trying to figure out what was wrong with these two individuals. And one of them actually told me what MCAS was because she had it. She called me up and wanted to learn more about low-dose naltrexone, which I have expertise in. And she said, I have POTS and MCAS. I said, what's— what are those? And basically those are conditions that hitherto had been relegated to allergists and cardiologists and neurologists, but they really didn't make their way to the gastroenterology literature. So I learned a lot from her and then helped her figure out how to manage SIBO, which had not been connected, and also how to manage naltrexone.

And then the other one was a patient who had all kinds of symptoms, but she had SIBO and complex regional pain syndrome. And in effort to find out why she was having this terrible pain, we uncovered the diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome as explaining her sleep apnea, basically, uh, OSD, the, um, loose membranes that collapse when you're sleeping, leading towards, uh, sleep apnea. And this OSA then will lead towards increased inflammation, which I thought had a role in causing her complex regional pain syndrome. And then treating the sleep disturbance, the sleep apnea disturbance, the SIBO, and then giving low-dose naltrexone, it helped a lot. And then later on, after her case report was published, it became clear that she developed more symptoms compatible with mast cell activation syndrome. So things came around in a circle, and started discovering in more and more of my patients that they had the evil triad.

[05:31] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Dun dun dun. I'm sure.

[05:34] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Basically, it's EDS, it's MCAS, and it's POTS, Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome.

[05:43] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's interesting. So, when you started diving deeper into people with EDS and sort of researching all of those things that had kind of come together through all of the trying to uncover what was this issue and this issue and this issue with that one patient. What GI disorders have you discovered are more prevalent in EDS, hypermobility spectrum disorder, and MCAS?

[06:09] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Okay, wow. Well, first of all, you could say every single GI symptom known to mankind can be a common problem in all of these patients with all of these syndromes, whether you're talking about difficulty swallowing, sores— let's start from the top— sores in the mouth, burning mouth, difficulty swallowing, chest pain, heartburn, upper abdominal discomfort, bloating, gas, constipation, diarrhea, and disordered bowel elimination. As far as symptoms, that covers from top to bottom. As far as syndromes, well, that's the thing. I always hated the word syndromes because it just didn't make sense that we had so much of our lives spent in medicine and research, and there were so many smart people, but there are so many conditions that are called syndromes, and therefore the underlying cause was never really known.

Well, if you take a bunch of syndromes that you can imagine, um, you know, like fibromyalgia syndrome, interstitial cystitis syndrome, irritable bowel syndrome, and you, and you look at these symptoms, well, these are symptoms that patients with our friendly, uh, evil triad experience all the time, and they suffer from these syndromes. And when you get down to it, you can come up with a common denominator for many of them and say, okay, all these syndromes in your body are caused by mast cell activation syndrome and/or POTS. Ehlers-Danlos, on the face of things, you'd say, well, why should a bendy body person, uh, have GI symptoms or mast cell symptoms or POTS? But in fact, if you're coming in from that angle, they do have an increased frequency of those two syndromes. There is an idea that mast cell activation syndrome, with release of chemicals that cause growth may actually be part and parcel of the cause for hypermobile EDS. With increasing growth of tissues, of ligaments, of joints, and tendons in the joints, we get into the trouble of the ultimate sequelae leading towards the hypermobility. So it may be that in fact, MCAS may be at the heart of many patients who have hypermobile EDS.

[09:07] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That is so interesting. That's really interesting. And, and I think that, um, a lot of times people look at themselves as hypermobile and say, and say, perhaps I have EDS, and also I might have some of this, this, and this, and the hypermobility or the EDS is the thing in the middle and all the other things seem to them to be offshoots. And rather than saying, no, these, these things are all equal, or these things are all just as important and need that attention, at least from the, the people that I work with on a different side than in a clinical aspect, they're like, I have this, but then I have this and this, but it's not as big of a deal. But it really is. And dealing with one will absolutely help deal with the others. Like you said, they all sort of loop together. So if they've got these issues, if they've got some of these, these disorders, how, how would these be worked up and treated? I know that's a huge question.

[10:01] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Well, that is a huge question. Well, let me just step back. So I gave you a range of symptoms from top to bottom, north to south, but you have to also then say the syndromes that EDS is associated with. And that would include motility disorders, loopy droopy connective tissue in the gut leading towards small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, or in the colon chronic constipation. I— in patients who have POTS who have EDS, they have a higher frequency of gastrointestinal symptoms. But, you know, it's probably in that situation they also have MCAS that's just not diagnosed. There's a condition called median arcuate ligament syndrome, which is upper abdominal pain syndrome, where nothing is found unless you do a very special CAT scan. And it may be for Ehlers-Danlos syndrome that ligaments are pulled down, the tissue pressure is pulled down, and it tugs on the median arcuate ligament, and the artery gets trapped by that ligament, causing vascular steal and also perhaps mast cell activation.

So how do you diagnose these conditions? Well, let's just start with the triad. OK, of course, I'm speaking to the choir about hEDS. I don't think I need to elucidate that. But the EDS website is wonderful, especially finding professionals around the country. The MCAS, you just have to think of a variety of symptoms that are allergic, and inflammatory to start saying, how do you explain somebody who has 48 different symptoms? You know, I see these patients coming in who check off their review of systems, and there are check marks all over the place. And how can somebody conceivably have that? If they went to see another doctor, they would say this is somaticism, fabrication of illness. But they're actually— there is a validated questionnaire made by Dr. Mulderings on checking off the symptoms and coming up with a score to see whether you should suspect a mast cell activation syndrome of one type or another, basically a release of mast cell chemicals.

But then what you need to do for mast cell activation syndrome is to measure the chemicals that we have available to make a diagnosis, and that would be things like prostaglandin D2, histamine. Both of those require spinning in a cold centrifuge so you don't get artificial low values. There's a chemical called chromogranin A and tryptase. And I'll give you my point of view on tryptase. According to Dr. Afrin's work of a case series of over 400 patients, only 15% had an elevated tryptase. And yet the allergists have their own set of criteria, and if you don't have an increased tryptase and/or anaphylaxis, you're out of luck with that diagnosis. So they try to make it hard to diagnose MCAS, whereas it's not that hard. If you're a little more liberal, you'll get more patients diagnosed and have advantage of possibly helping more patients. And then of course there are 3 urine samples that can be done.

[14:16] Dr. Linda Bluestein: You bring up a great point though. A lot of it depends on finding the right doctor, right? Not most of the, the people that I've worked with have not been diagnosed with EDS or HSD through a GI specialist. So the people who've worked with you are so fortunate that you've been able to dig deeper and kind of tie those, those things together. For those people who don't have access to a doctor that's helping them find what they need to find out, but maybe do have some of these conditions, is there anything that you would want to share about things that patients could do on their own or things you would want them to know things like constipation and bloating or IBS, for example.

[14:59] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Right. Okay. Well, see, if you knew what was wrong with you, let's say you had a diagnosis of EDS and you had GI symptoms, you could plug that into Scholar Google, which is a wonderful website, and come up with articles. And some of the articles are in full-text mode, some of them are just the abstract. But if you're just dealing with the symptoms, then it's tougher. Now, once again, you say, if they had hypermobility and they had constipation, could they just plug that into the computer and come up with a differential diagnosis? And I think the answer is yes. But finding the right doctor is tough. I mean, I've, for the last 5 years, delved into MCAS, and I was seeing just tremendous amount of patients, but my, my partners in practice don't want to make that diagnosis. It's just too confusing for them once they get that diagnosis on somebody. They're willing, I think, more and more to turf it off to me to see if I would take on their patient who sounds like an MCAS patient. But it's tough.

And when you're talking about any one disease that has multiple disciplinary activities, if you will, basically symptoms in many parts of the body, it's very difficult for a specialist to think out of the box and get away from their, you know, GI box where they've got reflux problem do an endoscopy. Abdominal pain, do an endoscopy. Change your bowel habits, do a colonoscopy. I mean, it's— unfortunately, people are taught to start, uh, staying within their own box and not looking outside, and that's, that's a big problem. We just don't have a course in med school about multidisciplinary approaches to things.

[17:11] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And that's such a great point. And that's something that Dr. Bluestein and I have talked about so many times. When people say, what's the one doctor I should go to to get my diagnosis? Or what's the one place I should go? And we always say, it depends on where you are. But all it takes is one doctor. It could be your rheumatologist. It could be your GI. It could be a geneticist. It's just finding that one doctor that's willing, like you said, to look outside the box a little bit and to think a little outside the box. That's absolutely true.

[17:41] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Right. I just saw a patient last week that, you know, her geneticist, you know, said, yeah, you've got EDS, hypermobile. And by the way, you got a lot of GI symptoms. Maybe you should see Dr. Weinstock to try to work that out. And I wound up seeing her and yeah, she was an obvious case of MCAS.

[18:04] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I think part of that too is that, you know, we, we learned in medical school how to take a history, but then we get into practice and we don't have very much time, and so we really don't do much of taking a history anymore. Because what really shocked me as I started to do this more and more is in listening to the patient, you know, Dr. Afrin says this a lot and it really is true, the patient is telling you what's wrong with them. You just have to listen and take the time.

[18:32] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: The review of systems for me in med school was very— it was a difficult task to learn all the questions, to spit it out, to have a patient start talking about one and then leading on to a 5-minute discussion of one symptom, which was not, you know, the reason why they came to the hospital with a pneumonia or whatever. It's a skill that is hard to learn. And to this day, it's difficult. The questionnaire that Dr. Mulderings has is a great thing. I will have the patients fill it out, rate the severity of it. But, you know, even then, going on to those things, it can wind up going with a long explanation. And that said, as Linda said, you only have a certain amount of time in standard insurance-based medicine to see a patient and then get on and get on to the next. It's challenging.

[19:36] Dr. Linda Bluestein: It is. And knowing the questions to ask and as a patient, knowing what information to give can be really tricky.

Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Absolutely.

[19:45] Dr. Linda Bluestein: There are some symptoms that we've talked about, like constipation, bloating, that I think a lot of people are aware of and sort of already understand, There's a few things that come up consistently in people with hEDS or other connective tissue disorders that may not be as well understood, though. Can you just talk for a second about gastroparesis and SIBO as well? I think those are two that are serious and should be discussed and may not be on everyone's radar.

[20:13] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: OK, so gastroparesis is delayed emptying of the food from the stomach. And you can see it in patients who have MCAS, but more often in postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome since it's a case of autonomic dysfunction. And the parasympathetic or the vagal tone is responsible for the contraction waves to allow food to exit from the stomach. So I've seen some very severe cases of it. I've had several patients on it get jejunal feeding tubes, and it doesn't always, you know, respond to medications. It's tough. You know, you can use mestinon, which is a vagal activator. There aren't many great motility medicines. There's prucalopride that came out recently that has some activity there.

But if you have such a sympathetic imbalance, you know, it's hard to override it. So, you know, you can only do so much. You can change the diet, you could ultimately feed somebody liquids because usually liquids empty out of the stomach a lot better than solids. So, um, you know, that's some of the things. And then there are patients who have nausea, you think it's gastroparesis, but in fact they're emptying the food too fast, um, and then they fill up the duodenum too fast, and then they get expansion of their small intestine and nausea from that. And then there's yet one other condition that you have to think about when you're working up somebody for delayed gastric emptying is could they have superior mesenteric artery syndrome where they've lost weight, they've lost fat around the artery, and the artery basically contracts or puts pressure on the duodenum and shuts it off?

[22:24] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Do you see— that's interesting because I've had two different dancers somewhere on the hypermobility spectrum who have both had Superior Mesenteric Artery Syndrome, right? SMAS. And I have wondered if there was a link between those or not, but never had anybody mention that together. So that's really interesting. The SIBO, can you circle back to that really quick? Because that's one I don't think is on a lot of radars.

[22:51] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Absolutely. It's— there are many great sites to learn about SIBO. Siboinfo.com. But when you talk about small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, uh, you're dealing with a syndrome. So there are many different causes, over 40 different causes for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. When we look at the, uh, hEDS patients, they can have it for several different reasons. They can have the loopy droopy small intestine, and then it's hard to get around the small intestine to basically— you get basically a sewer with regards to the small intestine. So the viscerostasis, the sinking of the small bowel when you stand up, you just have a situation where it's hard for the contraction to move things up.

But there are other causes in EDS to cause small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. There's defective collagen synthesis, there's a deficiency of a protein, and also autonomic dysfunction. So if we're losing contractility, the small bowel will again get a sump situation where we just have this bacteria sitting around not getting cleared with good old migrating motor complex waves at night to do a sweeper wave to clean out the small bowel. So what happens is the the small bowel bacteria bind to the small intestine lining. It can cause inflammation. And of course, it can cause gas because you get carbohydrates that are poorly digested coming down, sits in the small intestine, or the sugars sit there, and then the bacteria start consuming it, causing gas production, bloating, distension. And if it's hydrogen, then it's usually diarrhea. And if it's methane production, it's usually constipation.

[24:57] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I have a question about the, uh, with SIBO and the breath test. How accurate is that?

[25:03] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Great question. Um, so it's in the 70% accuracy. You know, nothing is perfect, uh, because direct measurement by putting a tube down into the small intestine risks contamination. And, and then the other issue is, is that you may only be sampling the upper jejunum, but the problem is the upper ileum, and so you're not getting down far enough. But the studies where people have had too many bacteria in the duodenum, which is the first part of the small intestine beyond the stomach, if they've got bacterial overgrowth, they've got severe symptomatology, and it does correlate well with the aspiration and the breath test.

[25:53] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And if the breath test is negative but you strongly suspect SIBO, do you go ahead and treat with antibiotics or do you do further investigation, or how do you approach that usually?

[26:05] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: So, you know, as far as bloating, there are many causes for bloating. People always assume, well, it's bacterial indigestion and production of gas, but in MCAS, those patients can have spontaneous bloating not related to eating, or sometimes related to eating, as well because the mediators cause a paralysis of the small bowel with distension. And so that's one thing that can occur. We did look at a study of 139 patients who had MCAS and did breath tests on them and compared them to controls, and 30% of the MCAS patients had had typical SIBO with hydrogen elevation versus 10% of controls. So 1 out of 30 had a false positive breath test, you might say. And a number of the mast cell patients also had elevations of their methane levels. So certainly, you know, slow movement in MCAS can lead towards bacterial overgrowth. But if they don't have it, you know, think about treating the underlying mast cell activation syndrome. So, you know, should you treat a patient who's got a negative breath test? Well, if they give you additional symptomatology to make you think, let's say there's hydrogen sulfide or other bacteria in there with a terrible odor, a quick response to eating you know, 30 to 60 minutes after eating, then you could consider giving empirical therapy.

[27:54] Dr. Linda Bluestein: You had mentioned earlier a relationship between MALS, the median arcuate ligament syndrome, and MCAS. Would you just circle back to that and explain a little bit more on that?

[28:06] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Sure. So there are patients who have MCAS and POTS who are then discovered to have a median arcuate ligament syndrome on basically a breath hold, deep expiration breath hold angiogram CAT scan. So it's an angio-CAT scan. And when these patients have undergone the appropriate surgery, their mast cell symptoms improve. No, exactly why, we really don't know. And then their POTS can improve as well. It used to be thought, oh, this is just abdominal pain, upper abdominal pain. You may or may not hear abdominal bruit when you listen with your stethoscope in the upper abdomen. But, you know, now we know so much more. It's associated with the evil triad.

[29:07] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So you have written extensively about low-dose naltrexone and various different applications. Can you talk about low-dose naltrexone a little bit, what patients might want to know about that particular treatment?

[29:20] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: First of all, I don't think I could practice without it, and I've been using it since 2005, and I've been using it for conditions that are painful, including EDS joint pain, autoimmune conditions, or inflammatory conditions. And what it does, it's basically tricking the body to make more endorphins. So high-dose naltrexone, which has been out since 1984 for prevention of narcotic and alcohol abuse, was discovered very early on to work in a totally different way when low doses were used. And it was found out that when you use a low dose of it, 1 to 4.5 milligrams as opposed to 50 to 100 milligrams, something unique happens. Basically, it only stays in our body for 6 hours, and during that 6 hours, it binds to the nerve cells' endorphin endocrine cells that basically produce endorphins and enkephalin. And basically what is happening during that time, the body senses it's not getting enough of its normal circulating endorphins. And so it's starting to build more of the receptors and starting to build up more endorphins, but can't release it because it's being blocked. And then when the drug goes out and is excreted in the urine, then our cells that produce endorphins give us a big burst of endorphins, and we have more receptors for the endorphins so that they work better.

And so endorphins by themselves reduce pain. They also attach to T and B cells, lymphocytes, that are responsible for causing inflammation. And when we have a particular disease like, let's say, sarcoidosis or mast cell activation syndrome where there's too much inflammation going on, we can decrease it by changing the T and B cell activation. So the T cells are wrapped up with mast cell activation. There are these microparticles that come from T cells that activate the mast cell. And by tamping down on the T-cell activation, mast cell activation syndrome can get better. I looked at 116 patients treated with— who had MCAS treated with LDN, low-dose naltrexone, and 60% found improvement in a whole variety of symptoms. 20% couldn't tolerate it because maybe the endorphin storm or just general intolerance of medications by MCAS patients. And 20%, it just didn't work. But to have a drug that's more than 50% effective in MCAS is significant.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Absolutely.

[32:33] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Sarcoidosis was an amazing case that led to a case report where, uh, these nodules, low-density lesions in the spleen and the liver went away entirely with LDN, and the patient's main symptoms of severe fatigue, uh, was dramatically improved. So that was a case of sarcoidosis outside of the lung, and then we've had a couple of cases where pulmonary sarcoidosis patients have had significant improvement as well.

[33:09] Dr. Linda Bluestein: LDN is absolutely one of my, uh, preferred things as well, and I don't know what would happen if I, if I couldn't prescribe that either. So it's— I, I hear you. I totally agree. And what other therapies do you frequently recommend?

[33:25] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: So in EDS, the PEA and the LDN. In MCAS, you know, your ground steps or building blocks would be antihistamines, H1, H2 blockers, and now for the H2 blocker, we primarily have famotidine. You know, you can use cimetidine, but it has more drug interactions. And then there's nizatidine. It's just harder to find. Unfortunately, Zantac is gone from the market because that used to work pretty well as well. And then there's loratadine, and a host of the Allegra, uh, fexofenadine, which are the H1 blockers, the non-sedating H1 blockers. And each of those drugs should be given twice a day. Sometimes patients take it 3 times a day because it fades off.

Then, you know, I love vitamin C and D. Who couldn't benefit from C and D? Well, sometimes the C patients, people who are taking C, have trouble. So I like the sustained release C. And then, and then actually Dr. Mulderings, one of the experts and discoverers of MCAS, feels that we should be trying 500 of vitamin C as opposed to the 1,000 because there's a sweet spot that may be out there for some, for many patients. And then I again very quickly will try LDN for patients with MCAS. And, you know, quercetin can be helpful stabilizing the mast cell as well. So that's step 1, basically. And then the biggest step is also saying to the patient, you know, you got to look for your triggers, and diet plays a dramatic role in MCAS. So, uh, you, you know, need to try gluten-free, dairy-free, yeast-free, and look for histamine foods that could be exacerbating the problem.

[35:44] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That makes sense. And speaking of Dr. Mulderings, you wrote a paper with— published a paper with Drs. Afrin and Mulderings called COVID-19 Hyperinflammation and Post-COVID-19 Illness May Be Rooted in Mast Activation Syndrome. This was published fairly recently. Um, could you talk a little bit about what you would like for people to know about COVID-19 and hyperinflammation?

[36:10] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Okay, well, when you look at all the cells that are involved and somebody gets a bad case of COVID they have this wild cytokine storm that goes on that destroys their organs. And it's not necessarily the virus itself doing it, it's the reaction by our bodies to the virus creating the inflammation. And then there's a cascade that goes down on people where the variety of cytokines, which are inflammatory chemicals, will destroy our body. The— also there's hypercoagulability, which can cause heart attacks and pulmonary embolism and so— and strokes. And when we started thinking about this, and this was actually driven a lot by Dr. Afrin, he said, you know, a lot of the symptoms that patients are having with COVID and, and post-COVID syndrome, they just really sound like a patient with severe MCAS. So basically, it was his philosophy that if you've got an undiagnosed, unrecognized, untreated MCAS patient, of which we have a lot in our population, possibly up to 10 to 17%, then when you get a cytokine storm and you're activating the extremely mutated, hyperactive mast cell that this explodes and creates a continued and exaggerated cytokine storm.

And so when we looked at our own patients, and, you know, we have a research study group, a study group of mast cell experts, we've, you know, asked, well, were any of your patients getting very ill seriously ill or dying, the ones that you're treating? And the answer was no. So it really started coming, uh, to our philosophy, coming to a philosophy that if we could, uh, look at our own patient base, that if we could protect the bad patients that we have now who are sick, maybe this will apply to other people in the country. And when we looked at all the symptoms from head to toe that a patient experienced and compared them to what the symptoms were that patients with COVID acute and chronic, have, the overlap was dramatic. So many of the symptoms that these poor patients were having were the same as what we see with patients who have MCAS.

[39:06] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And I think that, you know, so many of the treatments for MCAS— I know the, the whole debate about do you create a bigger basket or a smaller basket for MCAS, but so many of the therapies are so safe that it seems logical to say, well, you can— whether it's because you have COVID or because you potentially have MCAS but you don't have COVID, that in many cases it's worth a try because we're not talking about some of the more toxic types of treatments.

[39:38] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Right. And they're being studied, you know, and they are absolutely being studied. And one of our members talked about his experiences with high-dose vitamin D, very exciting information, how that dramatically helped people. And there clearly is, if you're low in vitamin D in general, your chances of getting out of the hospital are much lower than if you have high vitamin D levels. So, you know, there was a study looking at, and published in the GI Journal, about using high-dose famotidine showing an improvement in hospital survival.

[40:17] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Speaking of famotidine, actually, would you be willing to briefly comment on famotidine versus PPIs? Because I feel like proton pump inhibitors are prescribed so readily, So many patients go on them and then they never really get addressed again about whether or not they could wean off. And, you know, they can interfere with nutrient absorption, right? And cause some other problems. Would you be willing to talk about that a little bit?

[40:44] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Sure. Well, it's, you know, when you've got a patient and you're doing an endoscopy and they've got an ulcerated esophagus and they've got scar tissue and narrowing, and they're really basically you know, stage 4 of an acid condition, there's really no other choice other than surgery to fix a hiatus hernia than to give a proton pump inhibitor. If somebody has mild to moderate heartburn, it really is important for the doctor to try as much as possible to keep it simple. And that would be working on dietary and behavioral modifications and trying to start with the H2 blocker because it's a lot easier to take somebody ultimately off an H2 blocker than it is a proton pump inhibitor. You have this hyperacid phenomenon when you take somebody off a proton pump inhibitor and whether it's because they've built more pumps. And then when basically the antagonist goes away, the PPI goes away, then they just start pumping out, pumping out acid like crazy. So it's tough. It's easy to write the prescription, but tougher to deal with the consequences.

As far as, you know, the real problems, you know, you could come up with, you know, 10 different things that PPIs could do for you. I don't see that much, you know, in terms of B12 deficiency or malabsorption. Most of them allow enough acid to come in to digest meat and not get indigestion because of that, or, you know, iron deficiency or B12 deficiency. So you're not shutting iron and the acid down completely. You're diminishing it. You may diminish it enough that your risk for C. difficile increases. You may be doing enough depression so that you're allowing excess bacteria to be in your stomach, and if you're regurgitating all the way up into the high esophagus, your risk for infection increases, for like pneumonia. But, you know, the other— even so, the calcium is a consideration as well. So that's a concern, and there's calcium citrate which you could take with your PPI to assure that your calcium will get absorbed. But even osteoporosis, there's some debate still about it, yet I do believe that there's increased risk of fractures. There are studies, you know, for and against that.

[43:45] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. And, and what do you recommend that patients do if they have difficulty finding a gastroenterologist who understands complex and frequently missed conditions like Ehlers-Danlos syndromes, mast cell activation syndrome, and some of the other things that we've been discussing?

[44:03] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Okay, well, you could try to educate your current gastroenterologist because, um, you— I wrote an article along with Dr. Mulderings-Zaffran, Dr. Pace, and Dr. Razai about MCAS, uh, basically called MCAS Primer for the Gastroenterologist, and I initiated that project after seeing and reading in our own GI journal, POTS: A Primer for the Gastroenterologist, and, um, and there's some recent studies that were published on a review of EDS by Dr. Fritzay, um, on Ehlers-Danlos and GI symptoms. So you could try to bring those into your doctor. You can see if they have access to them on their computer, or just print it out on your own, or keep on looking around. Now, there's some allergists who range from, I don't believe it exists, to I won't make the diagnosis unless the tryptase is high to, yeah, this sounds like MCAS, I'll treat it, is a big range. So an allergist may be helpful for MCAS. The EDS, I'd say if you look for physical therapists, they're the ones to tell you which doctors are in tune with EDS. And then some of those doctors are going to be aware of POTS and MCAS. But it's tough. I will say it's tough, and it's a difficult problem, and it's not going to get better until medical school changes.

[46:03] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, and, and we will have a link to those articles in our show notes also to make it a little easier for people to find specific things that Dr. Weinstock has mentioned today. So could you, as we're wrapping up here, would you be able to let us know what patients you're able to see and treat?

[46:21] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Me personally? Um, so, uh, first of all, because I have a Missouri license, I only will see Missouri patients. Um, and, you know, I, you know, I will see patients, uh, so if they just have POTS, I would prefer that they see cardiologists or neurologists. And there are autonomic neurologists around. They specialize in autonomic disease. And there are some cardiologists who are on board with treating POTS. And because basically the literature for POTS has been in the cardiac and neurology literature all this time. EDS patients only, if they don't have symptoms in other parts of their body, I think basically going to pain specialists. If everybody had access to doctors like you or in Providence, Rhode Island, where there's a great doctor. You know, life would be different if you could clone yourself. That'd be great. And then MCAS, yeah. So I'm seeing MCAS patients if they have predominant GI symptoms.

[47:48] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, that makes sense. And, and could you let people know where they can find you? And is there anything else that we should have asked you about?

[47:56] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: Okay, well, um, gi-doctor.net. I've got a lot of information and I post my articles there, so you may find some of the articles we talked about full length. Um, and, um, what to do— I mean, trying to find— so, uh, also for, um, mast cell activation syndrome, um, TMSFORACURE.org, T-M-S-F-O-R-A-C-U-R-E.org, has a lot of good things on it. And then I think it's, you know, it's really important that you look for resources, which you've probably made people available— made aware of, on surgical management of EDS. And you know, whether it's the mast cells that you have to deal with at the time of the sedation, that's really important. So if you have a crossover with EDS and MCAS, you got to make sure that you're getting intravenous pre-sedation therapy to reduce complications of the sedatives. And then there's you've made some wonderful handouts for the operative— addressing operative problems and including, you know, intubation and how the surgeon stitches you up.

[49:32] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Definitely not enough awareness in that arena for sure. So thank you for mentioning that. It is a great handout. Well, good. Well, Dr. Weinstock, I can't thank you enough for for coming on the podcast today. We've really enjoyed chatting with you, and, um, it's been really a great conversation. I'm sure a lot of people are going to learn a lot.

[49:56] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: My pleasure. Thank you so much.

[49:58] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, absolutely. And you all have been listening to Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD. Today we have been speaking with Dr. Leonard Weinstock, board-certified gastroenterologist and primary investigator at the Sundance Research Center and the St. Louis Pain Clinic. Dr. Weinstock, thank you again so very much for taking the time to come on the Bendy Bodies podcast and sharing your expertise with us today.

[49:56] Leonard Weinstock, M.D.: My pleasure.

[50:23] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Thank you for joining us for this episode of Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD, where we explore the intersection of health and hypermobility for dancers and other artistic athletes. Please leave us a review on your favorite podcast player. Remember to subscribe so you won't miss future episodes. Be sure to subscribe to the Bendy Bodies YouTube channel as well. Thank you for helping us spread the word about hypermobility and associated conditions. Visit our website www.bendybodies.org for more information. For a limited time, you could win an autographed copy of the popular textbook Disjointed: Navigating the Diagnosis and Management of hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and hypermobility spectrum disorders just by sharing what you love about the Bendy Bodies podcast. On Instagram, tag us @bendy_bodies, and on Facebook at Bendy Bodies Podcast. The thoughts and opinions expressed on this podcast are solely of the co-hosts and their guests. They do not necessarily represent the views and opinions of any organization. The thoughts and opinions do not constitute medical advice and should not be used in any legal capacity whatsoever. This podcast is intended for general education only and does not constitute medical advice. Your own individual situation may vary. Do not make any changes without first seeking your own individual care from your physician. We'll catch you next time on the Bendy Bodies Podcast.
