---
num: 64
title: "64. Demystifying Chiropractic Care with Dr. Carrie Skony"
date: "2023-03-23"
duration: "1h 0m"
description: "Chiropractic care has been around for over 100 years, but many people don’t quite know what it entails. Artistic athletes may be told to add regular chiropractic visits to their regimen to help relieve pain without really understanding why. \nHow does a method best known for joint manipulation work for those with hypermobile bodies? Is it a valid treatment option? And what exactly is it, anyway?\nDr. Carrie Skony is a certified chiropractic sports physician and owner of Perform Active Wellness Dance Medicine. Specializing in dancers, Dr. Skony sees many hypermobile bodies and sat to talk with us about how people with hypermobility may (or may not) benefit from seeing a chiropractor.\nDr. Skony defines chiropractic care for us, outlining the broad spectrum of options that fall under its umbrella. She covers what sort of issues may cause people to seek out chiropractic care, different kinds of chiropractic care people may encounter, as well as common misconceptions about chiropractors.\nDr. Skony cautions against indiscriminate joint manipulation, and describes how she changes her treatment approach when working with someone with symptomatic hypermobility. \nShe talks through her method of working with dancers through a variety of modalities, including hands-on treatments, strengthening exercises, and more.\nCommon comorbidities in hypermobile patients and how that may change Dr. Skony’s treatment approaches are explained, and she offers tips on how to find a good chiropractor in your own area. Finally, she shares her desire to educate dance instructors on working with hypermobility for future generations of dancers.\nIf you’ve been skeptical of chiropractic care, unsure of what it is, or a huge fan of it, this episode goes deep on the topic in an easy-to-understand way.\nLearn more about Dr. Skony here..\n.\n.\n.\n#Chiro #ChiropracticCare #Adjustment #JointManipulation #Hypermobility #Hypermobile #hEDS #EDS #Modalities #LowBackPain #Chiropractors #Subluxation #Dislocation #JointInstability #ChiropracticAdjustment #Headaches #Doctor #ChronicIllness --- Send in a voice message: https://podcasters.spotify.com/pod/show/bendy-bodies/message"
tags:
 - "EDS"
 - "Exercise"
 - "Treatment"
 - "Hypermobility"
audioUrl: "https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH1865805768.mp3?updated=1721670635"
videoUrl: "https://youtu.be/xuVaEb41HP4"
snippets: []
guests:
 - "Dr. Carrie Skony"
guestImages: []
---
Dr. Carrie Skony: Welcome back to the Bendy Bodies Podcast, where we speak with experts bringing you state-of-the-art information to help you improve your well-being, enhance your performance, and optimize career longevity. This is co-host Jennifer Milner here with the Hypermobility MD, Linda Bluestein.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: We are so glad you are here to learn tips to help you self-manage your conditions and live your best bendy life. This information is for educational purposes only and is not a substitute for medical advice.

Dr. Carrie Skony: I'm Jennifer Milner, a former professional ballet and Broadway dancer, and I struggled my whole career with hypermobility-related issues and injuries. Now I train dancers and want to make sure the next generation of hypermobile artists are better equipped to work to their fullest potential.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I'm Dr. Linda Bluestein, and I started Bendy Bodies to educate the hypermobile community. Despite being a physician, I experienced decades of symptoms before being finally diagnosed with hypermobile EDS. I've combined my medical education and personal experience to treat and coach patients and clients to optimize their quality of life.

Dr. Carrie Skony: Our guest today is Dr. Carrie Skony, certified chiropractic sports physician and owner of Perform Active Wellness Dance Medicine. Hello, Dr. Skony, and welcome to Bendy Bodies.

Dr. Carrie Skony: Hi friends. Thanks so much for having me. I'm so glad to be on here. We're so excited.

Dr. Carrie Skony: We are so excited. This is a conversation we wanted to have for a while. But before we dig in, go ahead and just tell us a bit about yourself.

Dr. Carrie Skony: Sure. Let's see here. Like you said, I'm a certified chiropractic sports physician, which means I got my doctorate in chiropractic. And then I did some postgraduate education in sports medicine and rehab. I have a private practice. I've been in private practice for 17 years in the Chicago suburbs, where I treat primarily dancers, youth, adolescent, pre-professional, and professional dancers. I do see other athletes. Adolescent athletes and active adults, but primarily I treat dancers, which is my real passion.

let's see here. I danced recreationally growing up in a small town. I loved, loved, loved to dance. I also grew like a really big fascination with movement and the human body. I loved the sciences. I got really interested in nutrition and fitness and exercise, and that was all so fascinating to me that I really thank dance for. I had a number of common injuries when I danced. And at the time, this was in the '90s, I think like a lot of our stories, there just wasn't a lot of help out there. And no one really knew what to offer or advice to give. And maybe I should stop dancing. And none of that seemed reasonable to me, of course.

My parents had always seen a chiropractor. And they had recommended maybe you just see a chiropractor. And I get really good relief. Very quickly. And the chiropractor I saw was more of what we would call a straight chiropractor. So she only did joint manipulation. She didn't have any other significant therapies that she did. But that was enough to give me some relief and keep me dancing. And so then I just got really interested. Like, what if there's a way to— I could help dancers, and I could use a natural approach, and I could use my hands, and we could talk about fitness and exercise. And help other dancers.

So then, you know, this kind of was like, I could do this. In the '90s, you know, dance medicine wasn't really a thing yet. And so it was kind of a far-fetched idea, I thought, for me. And then I went to school and then lo and behold, I come out and I start working with dancers. And it's just been so fun to watch this profession of dance medicine really grow. And I love that I get to use, you know, my background in chiropractic specifically to help dancers. But my passion is really helping dancers, you know, prevent injury, prevent recurrence of injury, empowering dancers to understand their bodies, promote health and wellness, and, you know, how to care for their bodies, how to train smarter, not harder, those kinds of things.

So adolescence is really where I love working with dancers because I feel like we can have the most impact on their lives and the trajectory of their dance career and just their health and wellness in general.

Dr. Carrie Skony: I would agree with that. And I think we all met— for everybody who cares, we all met in 2019, I think, in Montreal, right? And it's just been such a joy to be surrounded by medical professionals who have sort of a like-minded approach that are thinking, what can we do to prevent? What can we do to encourage longevity? And I think that's why our group kind of hangs out with each other, even though it's, you know, in space on the internet.

So you've been in our circle for a while, and, you know, we've been talking to you that way. We have been doing this podcast for— this is our third season, so 3 years now, and several listeners have requested that we do an episode on chiropractic care. And as Dr. Bluestein and I started asking around trying to find somebody who specialized in chiropractic care for hypermobility, it just became very obvious to us that if such a unicorn does exist, we didn't know them. So we do know you though, and we absolutely appreciate your approach to care and everything. And you do specialize in dancers, you do work with a lot of hypermobile people. So we thought we would kind of dig into a topic today that clearly needs more discussion. And there's a lot of misconceptions around chiropractic. There are a lot of things that people don't quite understand. So I thought we would kind of clear that up. So let's start with what defines chiropractic care. Lots of people think chiropractors are like the poppers, but that's not the full story. So how would you define chiropractic care?

Dr. Carrie Skony: Yes, right. Thanks. I just want to say thank you for having this topic on because I get a lot of questions also about chiropractic and I love your podcast and I think you just cover so many great topics. So I'm honored that you would cover this topic and have me on. So thank you both.

Okay, so chiropractic, if we kind of have this like broad picture of chiropractic, is basically a conservative, natural, drug-free, kind of holistic-minded approach to treating pain and dysfunction of the body. And that's kind of this all-encompassing, like, generally most chiropractors have this picture of like, let's help people restore their health and maintain wellness. Most people think of chiropractic by the one technique that we're most known for, and that's joint manipulation or chiropractic manipulation. And chiropractic was historically founded on that principle of manipulating joints, and so we're still really strongly known for that. In reality, it's just one technique that we use in a whole wide range of conservative approaches.

Going back, like historically chiropractic, like in the late 1800s, was founded on basically a philosophy that, you know, all the nerves that come out of the spine control all the body functions. And if there's disease or dysfunction in the body, it must be because those nerves are not working correctly. And so the philosophy was that perhaps there were bones out of place that were not working correctly and they were interfering with nerve function. And if we restored proper alignment, quote unquote, in the spine, nerves would work better, disease and dysfunction would go away. So that's where chiropractic started. There are still chiropractors who practice philosophy-based that way, although, you know, a lot has changed in medicine since the late 1800s, and chiropractic has evolved quite a bit since then.

And while there is still a lot of benefit to joint manipulation, and it is a really powerful, meaningful conservative way to treat the body. It's modernized quite a bit. So we don't use the bone out of place from— I'm going to speak for myself right now. I don't use the bone out of place theory. I don't often say like bones are misaligned. It's really just kind of a not accurate description of what happens in the body. We do get joint restrictions. We lose motion. We do have dysfunction in how muscles and ligaments and tendons work. And that can all be addressed with hands-on care and joint manipulation. But this idea that maybe a bone is out of place and if we treat the nerves, we can cure cancer, like that's all kind of in the past.

So chiropractic has modernized quite a bit and now includes exercise and rehab and therapeutic modalities and all a wide range of conservative drug-free options to help people live better, move better, feel better. yes, so joint manipulation is one part of chiropractic, but a lot of times people think like, I'm going to the chiropractor, I'm just going to get manipulated in my joints. you know, my practice, I have a sports medicine practice and rehab-based, so the way I practice looks a lot like how a physical therapist practices. You know, I use joint manipulation, but I also do really comprehensive orthopedic neurologic testing. I do— we do a lot of exercise in my office. Functional rehab.

And so, you know, and then chiropractic also exists on this big spectrum where I have chiropractic colleagues who go on to specialize in other fields of medicine. So chiropractic neurology, like functional neurology, functional medicine, chiropractic nutritionist, chiropractic radiologist, chiropractic internist, acupuncture. So there's, you know, chiropractic is this base principle of conservative treatment, and then you can specialize in a lot of areas from there.

Dr. Carrie Skony: Thank you for that. It's helpful to sort of understand that chiropractic is kind of a big broad umbrella term. So thinking about that and that it's a conservative approach to care, what sort of people tend to seek out chiropractic care?

Dr. Carrie Skony: So in a broad sense, again, I think anyone who's looking for maybe a more natural approach to health and wellness. So these are people who like don't want to jump into surgery. They don't want to— they would prefer not to take drugs if they can but, you know, they're more interested in nutrition or supplementation. They generally have, you know, an interest in health and wellness.

so in a broad sense, I think that draws people to chiropractic. In a really specific sense, of course, we have people who come to chiropractic because they have neck and back pain, you know. So that's the, like, I have neck pain and back pain, who would I see? I see a chiropractor. so that's a really— or headaches, you know. Those are probably the 3 most common, like people would be drawn to chiropractic.

yes. So, you know, I see chiropractors treat musculoskeletal injuries across the whole body. So, you know, anywhere there's a joint, a muscle, a tendon, a ligament, which is everywhere in the body, you know, we treat that. So for instance, you know, I have people who come to me because they don't want to have labral repair surgery on their hip yet or at all. And so we treat, you know, hip impingement and hip labral tears. Or, you know, the outcomes on meniscus surgery and rehab are very similar, and so people choose I don't really want to have surgery on me. I'd rather have rehab, you know. So they come for that. Ankle impingement, rotator cuff syndrome. So anywhere there's a joint and there's muscles and ligaments and tendons, we can treat that. And generally, you know, we get people who are like, hey, I'm willing to put in the work to do this conservatively to avoid the risks of medication or surgery.

Obviously, people with joint hypermobility get subluxations and dislocations, but sometimes the way it's presented, I feel like makes it more scary and makes people think that there's so much that's wrong in their body. And I think that we can be really thoughtful about how we say things that make people have more confidence in their body and more confidence in their ability to get better, I guess.

So you probably see lots of hypermobile people. Some of them struggle with chronic dislocations, subluxations. So, you know, would they benefit from chiropractic care even if their joints are already what we would say, quote unquote, too loose or which of those patients would likely benefit? Obviously knowing that this is general information, not a one-on-one consult.

Dr. Carrie Skony: Right, right, right, right. So, yeah, great question. if I can go back, like, you know, in hypermobile patients, subluxation is a real medical term. It's a partial dislocation. The problem is chiropractors have adopted the term subluxation in a non-dislocation way. so subluxation is a common term. We say sometimes chiropractors are subluxation based, meaning they believe that there is a bone out of place or there's misalignment and they want to correct the subluxation. It's not exactly how that happens. And, you know, I don't want to disrespect, you know, colleagues in my field, but, in hypermobile patients, we use the term actually subluxation. You know, there is partial dislocations of the joints because of the hypermobility. So, you know, certainly we need to be careful about hypermobile patients who are experiencing true subluxations through there and protecting those joints well.

I see a lot of hypermobile patients, and they can benefit a lot from chiropractic. I mean, here's the thing, joint manipulation is a powerful tool. It's— it can reduce acute pain pretty quickly, even if it's for a short period of time. Sometimes we use joint manipulation to reduce pain in a painful area so that we can then work on stabilization and strengthening in that area. Sometimes, you know, if I have someone who has a disc herniation and, you know, they can tolerate a joint manipulation, it will reduce their pain enough that then we can do the next step. And I like to use joint manipulation as one step in the process to get to other steps. We're trying to improve overall function on the body. And sometimes manipulation is one way that we can do that.

In hypermobile bodies, they don't always need joint manipulation or mobilization. Obviously, there's a lot of mobility in the joint already. And with great mobility comes a great responsibility to try to stabilize those joints and be strong through there. So a lot of the work I do with hypermobile patients is reframing their thinking about their joints and what they're feeling. You know, teaching them when it would be appropriate that we could move a joint into, you know, other ranges of motion and when we should not, perhaps.

I use joint manipulation very sparingly with my hypermobile patients. When I can, or when it's appropriate, I'll offer like more low-grade mobilization techniques. Some chiropractors use like instrument-assisted joint manipulation, like an activator technique, which you know, a lower force technique for moving joints that can be appropriate in hypermobile patients. Otherwise, you know, I prefer with dancers especially to work on joint stabilization, retraining the proprioception around the joint, having them not rely on, you know, that feeling of that immediate relief that they get from joint manipulation.

And so if we can pull them back from that and get them to realize, okay, what my body really is craving is stability and strength. And for a lot of my dancers that come in, you know, sometimes— often, I will say often— I'm the first time they're ever even learning that they're hypermobile. You know, I think you guys have talked a lot about this too, of like these dancers, they just don't know. You know, they think, I'm a good dancer, I'm really flexible, like you know, my teachers give me a lot of roles because I'm so good at them. It's like, oh yeah, you have generalized joint hypermobility, or, you know, very specific joint hypermobility, and they don't know what that means. And there's a lot of education that happens there.

I know you guys do a lot of that also. but so hypermobile patients, answer your question, yes, they can get joint manipulated in certain circumstances when you were using it responsibly and appropriately. I use it sparingly. If at all. I think it can help with acute pain when our dancers can feel like, okay, this actually does feel like I subluxed this today, or I'm getting a lot of rib pain or my low back, and we can get them some immediate relief to move on to the next place.

And here's the other thing for hypermobile dancers that a lot of them are cracking their joints on their own. There's a lot of self-manipulation happening in the dancer population, especially when they're hypermobile. And it's understandable. It's very relieving. It gives them a lot of proprioceptive feedback, which they're lacking in their joints. It gives them immediate sense of relief. There's a neurochemical response where they're feeling like an endorphin-like response of like, oh, I'm getting pain relief from this. They— that stretch reflex on the muscle or around the tendons feels good to them. And so they— and it happens easily for them. It's really easy for them to click pop everywhere.

So a lot of them are self-manipulating anyway. And I feel like if that's happening, which I educate them not to do generally, the chiropractor is a great place to be to do that safely. Like, I'd rather have you stop doing that on your own and see a chiropractor who can tell you like, okay, this is where you need motion. You definitely don't need motion in this joint. We're not putting more motion in this joint. You don't need it. You need stability and strength here.

And so regardless, a chiropractor is trained to move those joints safely as opposed to when a dancer is doing it by themselves and they're kind of perpetuating this cyclic pattern of like stretch a joint, feels better, stretch a joint again, feels better. And you just keep stretching these ligaments and creating more and more instability or promoting the laxity in the joint. And that almost always leads to problems. I don't know if I answered your question, but—

Dr. Carrie Skony: Can I just clarify something in there really quick?

Dr. Carrie Skony: Yeah.

Dr. Carrie Skony: You said a lot of dancers want to self-manipulate anyway. And so if they're going to do that, they might as well go see a chiropractor and have them do it. I know you, so I know— I'm pretty sure what you're saying is not, if you like to twist and pop your lower back, have a professional do it for you instead. You're not saying seek out a professional to do that joint popping that you already like to do. You're saying we acknowledge that dancers do enjoy that popping feeling. So let's go talk to a professional about why they enjoy that popping feeling, where they might need some relief, and what they should be doing instead. I just didn't want people to hear that and be like, oh, I'll go to a chiropractor. And I can pull up my menu and tell them, do this, this, and this for me.

Dr. Carrie Skony: Yeah, thanks for clarifying. It made more sense in my head when I said it. But you said that lovely. I do, you know, I get dancers who come to me who have been referred to chiropractors already for neck pain and back pain because we know our hypermobile dancers do have quite a bit of neck and back pain at times. And so their first choice is chiropractic, you know, and there are chiropractors who are maybe not as selective in what they do or are maybe only joint manipulation is the only thing they offer, and everyone who walks into the office gets the same treatment. And, you know, I highly discourage hypermobile dancers from seeking out that type of care.

It can be self-fulfilling of like, oh, I go, you know, I've had patients who are like, well, you know, as young as 10, 11 years old, I go to the chiropractor twice a week for the last 5 years. Like, oh wow, and why are you, you know, tell me why you're here. Well, I'm in a lot of pain. Okay, like, you know, let's talk about that. Is it working? Is that working for you?

So, I, again, joint manipulation can be a tool that we use. But in the hypermobile dancer, gosh, I just think we have to be really, really cautious. And I err on the side of not moving hypermobile joints whenever possible. It's uncommon for me to manipulate my hypermobile dancers. And I do spend a lot of time educating them about why that is. I want them to know.

And a lot of them, once they understand what that, you know, self-manipulation or the chiropractor they're seeing twice a week, you know, what that's doing to their joints and why that might be difficult for a hypermobile joint long term, most of them are on board right away. Like, absolutely. Like, now I get it. I'm on board. Like, I want to preserve my joints. I want to protect my dancing. yes.

I'm so glad that you brought up about the self-manipulation, because whether I am seeing someone one-on-one or giving a talk, you know, you see people doing those things constantly. Constantly. And I have some self-manipulation that has become habitual for me. And if you just like Google or, you know, ask a lot of people, they'll say, oh no, no, that's fine to do. But I have the same philosophy that you do, that especially if you're doing it repetitively, that that's really problematic. And trying to understand why, why you feel the need to do it is so important. And that that's different, right, from spontaneous, like you just moved and something made a sound.

Yes, absolutely. It's okay for joints to move, and it's okay for them to make noise, especially in our hypermobile dancers. And that's not scary or alarming. It's when we do it forcefully, repetitively, habitually for an effect that is not serving you a purpose long-term. It's a short-term relief that's probably causing more harm than good in the long run.

So a lot of room for education there in teaching our dancers about, you know, the safety of joint motion and stabilizing their joints. And a quick follow-up to that. I feel like a lot of people think if there's a sound, if there's a cavitation or whatever, therefore the joint either was subluxed or it now is subluxed. So can you quickly explain the difference between those? Because I feel like that's an important thing.

Dr. Carrie Skony: Yeah, the sound doesn't mean much. You know, we kind of start to connect like I heard a sound, it feels good, something positive really happened. We can manipulate joints and not get a sound. There's fluid in a joint. When you take a joint to its end physiological range of motion, there's a little bit of a basically like a negative pressure effect in the joint. There's gas bubbles that can be released. It creates a cavitation or sound, a popping sound through there. For some people, you know, the feeling is like when you get to the end range physiological range of motion, that feels good to them. It just so happens there's a pop too. But the pop doesn't really mean anything.

But, you know, I've seen dancers who crack their toes, for instance, I mean, they have really hypermobile toes and they're cracking their toes over and over again and they'll keep cracking to try to get a sound. In the meantime, they get themselves capsulitis, you know, they have completely stretched ligaments, they have, you know, toes that bend past 90 degrees. Their, you know, their big toe joint is swollen and painful and it's like, stop, just stop. You know, you don't need that. You're not going to— we don't need to crave this sound. The sound we don't correlate with much.

So we know that some people will have asymptomatic joint hypermobility, and other people have symptoms related, and it could be that they have Ehlers-Danlos, it could be that they have hypermobility spectrum disorder, they could have a variety of different things. If someone comes to you and you're working with them and they have symptomatic joint hypermobility, does that change your approach in working with them?

Dr. Carrie Skony: Yes, yeah, definitely. I mean, everything then goes through the hypermobility lens too, you know, first probably the, the first thing that comes to mind is that I try really hard to not, like, don't chase the pain. because my hypermobile dancers often, you know, we'll set up maybe like a treatment plan, like, I want to see you once a week for 6 weeks, and let's, you know, come up with a plan of what you can work on at home and at the studio. But every one of those times they come in, they're like, okay, today my shoulder, and like, low back, and today it's my ankle.

And, which I, you know, I can totally sympathize with. But I try not to chase the pain. We try to look big picture of like, okay, here's the deal. Like, I'm going to try to give you some relief today. I'm going to teach you some self-care strategies of how you can handle this because you may get these pains again. I'm not going to solve this problem today. You may— this may happen again. Your shoulder may hurt from time to time. Here are some self-care strategies. Here are the exercises I want you to do instead, you know.

And then we really have to take this like big long-term focus of like, you know, I think sometimes people go to chiropractors, it's like, I want a quick fix, like fix me, you know, and I feel better. But then they feel like I have to go back 2 days from now because I don't feel good anymore. So in a hypermobility lens, it's like, yes, I want you to be out of pain today so that you can go back to class or rehearsals. But also I'm going to— here to remind you, we are looking for long-term success with your body and wellness. And so you know, my focus is really reminding of that every time they're— reminding them of that every time they're in.

Here's how we're going to work on stability of the joint. Here's the exercises you're going to do. The other thing is, I mean, hypermobile bodies that come in, they just can't always tolerate as much as other athletes. Hypermobile bodies, as you guys know, have good days and bad days, you know. And so we have to ask, you know, is today a good day? Do you, you know, do you feel like you have a lot of fuel in your tank? Can you give us some effort today? Do you feel like doing some exercise? Exercises? Should we review what we did last time? You know, and sometimes they didn't— they weren't able to this last week. Hey, this last week, like, man, everything hurt, or, you know, I really struggled with this. I didn't get to my exercises. Like, okay.

So a lot of times it's a much slower approach. I don't throw as much at them, as I would some other athletes because I just know there's a lot of variables in there. of course, you know, talking about self-manipulation with a hypermobile dancer, we always talk about breaking that habit and not doing self-manipulating. So that's, you know, that's always one of my first conversations with hypermobile dancer that comes in.

I think I already mentioned, of course, like using manipulation sparingly as my treatment technique with hypermobile dancers or bodies in general, like focusing more on supportive care. So let's talk about, you know, what kind of pillow do you have? You know, what kind of mattress are you on? What's your own? What's your, you know, how heavy is your backpack? You know, teaching here are some taping strategies that you can use for support on your own. You can do this at home. You don't need me to do this. I can teach you how to do it. Joint braces if they need that. Educating a lot about, you know, what they're doing in the studio and rehearsals. A lot, you know, a lot.

There's such a big education component, especially if this is all new information to patients and they don't know, like, I don't even know what hypermobility is. I didn't know hypermobility had a spectrum, you know, like, so I try not to overwhelm them with a lot of information at once. I try to feed them little bits at a time, like, you know, this joint has a— is a little bit more lax, and this is what that means. And then, you know, we kind of progress from there.

And because I take a holistic approach then with hypermobile bodies especially, we tend— I tend to start to get into more questions about like, hmm, what about like, do you ever have GI dysfunction? You know, have you— how's your digestion? How's your nutrition? And then I can guide them to the appropriate resources. You know, I have some training in all of those areas, but that's not my lane. So I refer out, you know, then I send them to Kristen Koskinen for nutrition, or let me send you for my functional medicine doctor for a GI workup, or, you know, you have stress and anxiety, like, let's get you in with a counselor, like, let's work through some of that stuff.

so I do that with a lot of my patients, but I feel especially for young bodies and hypermobile bodies, I feel a huge responsibility to be a resource for them and to advocate for them. We do— we talk a lot about self-advocacy in classrooms which is a huge issue. I know you guys know about, trying to get them to advocate for their bodies in the classroom. And so I try to be a resource for that and create communication with their instructors.

And so yes, there— I mean, there's a lot that went up. When a hypermobile patient comes in, there's— it just is this all-encompassing, encompassing, like, okay, let's, you know, let's pick this apart. You know, and in the end, I look at patients like they're a puzzle, you know, and there's all these different pieces of the puzzle. And my job is just try to help them put the pieces back together. Like, you know, okay, we have, we have a little anxiety. Like, here's what— let me teach you about that, and then let me point you to resources, or some— the GI, or, you know, chronic subluxation, things like that. So we've tried just trying to piece all these things together and help them in that process.

Dr. Carrie Skony: That's great. I think there are, there are a few different kinds of people that I've run into with, in regards to chiropractic. There are the people who are like, oh, those poppers, like they just want to get you in there. And there are like, chiropractic is a huge field, right? You said it encompasses so many different things and you can go on to specialize or do just, general chiropractic, I guess. So there are some really bad chiropractors out there, just like there are really bad Pilates trainers out there as well. So, so some people may have had bad experiences, or they may think somebody just wants me to come in twice a week for the rest of my life so they can adjust me.

And then there are people who are like, I love chiropractors. They're fantastic. They really help maintain me. They really help move forward. This conversation hopefully is shedding some light on the possibilities of what you can get with chiropractic care and with what you can have through it.

I, I have been through chiropractic care most of my, most of my dance career and was fortunate enough to work with a really good person early on. And she recognized my hypermobility. And one of the best things she did for me was to arm me with information for when I traveled. So when I was out on tour and having to look up other doctors, like she literally wrote notes about how to put blocks under my hips or how to do this and that. And I would hand the notes to them and they'd be like, this makes no sense. And I'm like, it doesn't have to. Like, this is the, this is the recipe that works, so just read this, you know.

So I think that the education that you're talking about is so key. and the other piece that is really important for me as a hypermobile person who does go see a chiropractor is the concept of moving really slowly, as you said, because there can be some great days and bad days. But also, as you said, we kind of crave that release. but if, if a person— if a hypermobile person is tight, it's for a reason.

Yeah, there, there is tightness going on to help stabilize something that is unstable. And what my current chiropractor has kind of learned with me, because she wasn't a specialist in hypermobile people— you know, most people aren't— is that a little bit goes a long way. And if she does some release work like soft tissue or anything, you might do just a tiny bit, but if you do too much, then all the joints are like, we're free, and they go running and something dislocates. So it's that constant, a little release, a little strengthen, a little release.

And I think that's such a huge important component for working with hypermobile people is understanding you can't go, oh, that whole shoulder is so tight, let me just release all of it, because then the arm just falls out of the socket, right? So like you said, education is so important.

Dr. Carrie Skony: Yeah. And if I could, if I could talk about that for just a second, because I think a conversation I have a lot with dancers is there's a difference between feeling tight and being tight. And it's a really common conversation we have. You know, if a hypermobile dancer comes in and says like, oh, my hamstrings are so tight, and it's like, okay, let's check, let's check, you know, let's see what's happening. So helping them to understand like tightness is there, if there's tightness there in the muscle, it's there for a reason.

And you stretching the hamstring or the joint excessively into oversplits or, you know, hanging out in a straddle position is not serving you. It's not fixing the tightness. So, you know, if a dancer says my hamstring is really tight and I can take their leg to their nose, like, okay, I just want to say like the hamstring is not actually tight, but I understand you that you feel tight. And so we need to understand why is that that you feel tight?

So is the joint craving stability? Have you been, you know, really overusing the hip joint? Or maybe the core is lacking some strength and stability, been overworking in the back, the hamstrings are tightening up, you're feeling a tension because your body is trying to create stability in an effort to have a bigger role around the joints. And I think that reframing is just so powerful for them.

And, you know, I often catch them and they learn really quickly in my office of like they walk in and say, oh, my neck is tight. And I'm like, mm-hmm. Like, you know, let's just think for a second. Like, do we think the neck is tight or does the neck feel tight today? And they say, you're right, the neck feels tight today. Okay, great. As long as we can reframe that. And I think that helps them understand, like, I don't, I don't need to sit in a stretch to fix this problem. That's not it. And then they understand, okay, Dr. Carrie gave me all these tools to use. So if I feel tight, what can I do?

For that. And I can work on my proprioceptive exercises. I can work on joint stabilization exercises. I can work on my strengthening. I can use a taping technique, you know, all of these other things that are actually going to have a positive effect on what their body is craving. So that's something that I use a lot with dancers.

Dr. Carrie Skony: Well, and if, if I'm feeling tight, like my back starts to, you know, get crabby because I'm so loose, and my chest might start to get tight, right? And so if my chest gets tight, I just want to stretch my chest, and my chiropractor's like, no, you have to strengthen your back. And I'm like, shut up, I don't, I don't want to work, I want you to just like open, you know? But I understand what she's saying, and I would love to just fall in the straddle and stretch, but instead we actually have to strengthen what it is that's making us feel like we need to fall in the straddle and stretch.

So I really appreciate that. Is there, are there, are there issues that are common in people with hypermobility disorders? Because we know people with disorders do have a lot of common comorbidities. Are there some sort of issues that might kind of give you pause in treating a certain issue that you'd be like, ah, let's wait until we know for sure, or anything like that?

Dr. Carrie Skony: yes. So one that I see most often would be like lumbar stress fractures. Because of hypermobility, there tends to be a lot of lumbosacral extension. Our dance teachers often exploit that hypermobility, lots of tricks. And, you know, dancers want— I can, so I want to, you know, take my back this far, my leg this far, whatever. So there's a lot of extra impact forces there. In combination with not as much joint support. And so I do get lumbar stress fractures quite a bit in the office. It's, you know, I can still treat around there. So I wouldn't say that necessarily gives me pause in that area, but it's definitely high on my radar of like, okay, we need to get this evaluated for sure. And we go for imaging sooner so we can get a proper diagnosis on that.

I don't— I do see this, but less commonly would be like upper cervical instability. So the ligaments, and particularly in the upper part of the cervical spine by your head, anywhere, of course, ligaments can be lax, but especially there, you know, we have some really sensitive structures through there at the base, at the brainstem, the base of the brain. So we don't want to mess around too much if there's a lot of suspected laxity in the cervical ligaments, just a lot more susceptible tissues or injuries through there.

Some EDS and hypermobile dancers are more susceptible to like a Chiari malformation, which is, you know, basically like a herniation of part of the brain into the spinal canal. So we need to be aware that those things exist. Hypermobile dancers often have like dizziness or, you know, fainting, like syncope. They'll faint sometimes, and so there's some vascular issues there that we need to be cautious of. So I'm careful just on what techniques I'm using, you know, how aggressively we're working even on exercise, you know.

But certainly with cervical manipulation, I'm much more cautious because of the laxity component through there. Dancers who present with like, oh, I'm dizzy all the time and I faint sometimes and I have chronic daily headaches. Like, okay, like we need a referral. Like I'm not adjusting your neck today. We need a referral to evaluate further like what's happening through here. And maybe that's just, you know, it might be quote unquote normal for them because of, you know, POTS or anything else. But we want to get that evaluated.

What else? I'm really careful around the shoulder because of shoulder dislocations. So I think just monitoring what techniques we do, even exercises, being cautious of that hypermobility and hyperextension in the knees and the elbows when we're doing exercises or even in the wrists. Like if we're doing floor work, it's like, okay, we need to be careful because you may not be able to tolerate loading the wrist or the elbows during any of our exercises. So we have to get creative sometimes. I know you guys experience that as well. And Jen, especially you with your Pilates work. What kind of things make you think specifically, oh, we need to do imaging for this dancer?

Dr. Carrie Skony: That's kind of hard to explain. There's a pretty common clinical presentation. So if someone comes in, we can point to the pain. It's there. It's at L5-S1. They can point to it. It's sharp. It hurts during these orthopedic tests. It hurts every time I arch my back. It hurts with jumping. And so we kind of just go through this orthopedic eval where it's like, oh, this one starts to raise like this fit, this checks all, it starts to check all the boxes.

Sometimes we'll do a trial of conservative care, like, okay, let's work on this 2 or 3 visits. But if I still have a really high clinical suspicion and you're getting no relief from the things that I can provide you with stabilization or manipulation if it's appropriate, or, you know, any other technique we're using for pain management, if they're like, no, it's still an 8 out of 10 pain, like, okay, that's a really high clinical suspicion for me.

And, you know, in reality, in dancers, like, it's not even the dancers who are just doing hyperextension movements. So particularly dancers who have a lot of mobility, if they have a hard time controlling functionally what their core is doing and they have a hard time like stacking the rib cage or they're in an anterior pelvic tilt or, you know, they're doing a lot of jumping and that can cause a lot of compression and extension in the lumbar spine, even if you're not in extreme ranges of motion.

And you know, stress fracture in any case is a case where the load is greater than the capacity. So there's some mechanical dysfunction, whether it's anatomical structural or it's functional because of weakness someplace. The capacity of the body is lower than the ability to handle the load that they're giving it. So yes, it becomes very apparent when we have dancers who are doing, you know, lots of tricks and overarching their back. And but it doesn't have to be that. I see dancers who are just training hard and not doing anything too abnormal, but maybe have these other functional weaknesses that lower their capacity to tolerate the load. And that can contribute, not to mention like growth spurts. And, you know, there's a lot of other contributing factors to stress fractures. And I see that in some, well, gymnasts too, right? We see that in gymnasts, of course. But I see that in some of my patients that are not dancers or gymnasts. It seems like those fractures are not that uncommon, or at least in this population of people.

Dr. Carrie Skony: Yes. Right. That makes sense. I mean, I can obviously see how exploiting the super flexibility can cause them, but also the impact of it. People don't think about that, but I've, I've seen more, impact, I think, or originated stress fractures in the low back from gymnasts than in dancers, from all of the hard landing they do and the way they absorb it in their lower back. But I could see why that would be an issue in hypermobile dancers, just with the inability to control their spine and absorb the load from jumping, efficiently. Yeah, so I could definitely see that.

Dr. Carrie Skony: You know, also, I think it's something we need to continue to make sure all of our providers are really well-educated, which is why what you guys do is so powerful. But, you know, when we think about a dance instructor saying, oh, your low back still hurts? Okay, go see the chiropractor. It still hurts? Okay, keep going to see the chiropractor. And, you know, if we're seeing someone who is not really attuned to what the risks are or looking for those risk factors or maybe is not doing a full orthopedic neurologic exam, like, you know, then as dancers, we think like, oh, it's normal to be in pain. It's normal. You know, my back still hurts. My back still hurts. It still hurts. Like, oh, I had a busy week. My back still hurts. Like, ugh, you know?

And so I think educating our instructors and educating medical providers more about hypermobility and what to look for. Of course, you know, I want everyone to understand what the stress that dancers go through. But you know, I, I think we think about sometimes there are chiropractic facilities that don't do full examinations, and are, you know, you're in and out in 5 minutes. And, you know, I don't want to be disrespectful to my colleagues, but I think it waters down what we can offer in the profession. and I think there, there's some risk there if we're not really understanding what's walking in the door. And we can't just manipulate, manipulate away pain all the time. At some point you need to be like, okay, what's, what's actually happening here? What, what is going on?

And so yes, you can go to a facility down the street and walk in and get adjusted. They take walk-ins and you feel better and you walk out. But it's such a disservice to what chiropractic is and can offer on a whole, and also just a disservice to patients of like, boy, you really deserve a full— I mean, everyone does, of course. Every condition deserves a full workup. But it's common now to see like, I just want to pop in my chiropractor and pop out. And that makes me nervous for dancers especially.

Dr. Carrie Skony: So as you have just explained, there can be a really wide variety of chiropractic care out there that can be the really great, full-on, full exam every time you walk in, very comprehensive, including physical therapy exercises, all of that. And it can be what feels more like a drive-through, you know, order off the dollar menu and you're on your way again. So, for everybody who is not in the Chicago area, which is where you live, and would be great to be able to see you, what should someone be looking for when they are searching for a chiropractor? Like, how do they know?

Dr. Carrie Skony: Yeah. You know, referrals are a good option. So, if you know someone who's been somewhere and they can attest to their experience, that's a good, that's a good option. I think looking for chiropractors who are certified in additional like methods, so like sports medicine or rehab. Generally, if there's chiropractor who's, who has additional training and certification for sports medicine rehab, they are taking an active approach to care. It's not a like subluxation-based, philosophy-based care. It is like, okay, we're here to make you work. We're going to work together. We're going to be a team. And so that's a good starting place. Is someone who has some certification with sports medicine.

I do see chiropractors who do have that and advertise that and still have really quick, non-thorough visits. So that's probably not a be-all end-all, but it's a good starting place. Let's see here. Anyone who's rehab-based, of course. Let's hear. I think a doctor who takes a detailed history. So, you know, my first visits are 60 minutes or longer. So someone who's who's really trying to understand you as a person. They want to know your full medical background. They're, you know, looking at how you move and function. I think that's a good option.

You can ask, well, how long do you spend with a patient? You know, if you're interviewing for a chiropractor, how long are you spending with the patient? Generally, like, subsequent visit, we like at least 20 minutes, if not 30 to 60 minutes of care, so that you know there is— you're not just walking in and getting adjusted and leaving. You know that there is actual you know, therapies. And you can ask, are there exercises that are going to be prescribed? Does someone watch me do those exercises, or are you just going to hand me a sheet and send me home with exercises? You can ask, like, you want to do those exercises supervised. You want someone who understands how to squat and how to lift and how to bend, and you want someone to teach you that. You just don't want someone to hand you an exercise sheet and send home.

I think looking for someone who's willing to create a personalized plan for you that is unique to your goals. And some of this stuff is just, you have to interview, you know, you go to an appointment, you interview them. It's hard to gain some of this information from a website or, but, you know, what people say online. let's see here, what else?

I think, you know, staying away from cookie-cutter type treatments where like maybe there's a scare tactic of, you know, okay, I'm gonna go back. I think staying away from chiropractors who'd maybe do do like full spine x-rays on every patient. It's not clinically indicated to do that. it's unnecessary, it's overutilization. so that's always a flag for me of like, oh, do we need that? Like, is that, is that clinically indicated?

or someone who uses x-rays as a scare tactic. I don't love that, you know, like, oh, see how this is what a normal neck looks like and this is what like, ooh, this is bad, you know, I can fix that. You just need to come to me 3 times a week for the next 6 months. And it's like, oh, you know, I would not sign up for that kind of care. You may get some temporary relief from joint manipulation through there, but I think that's not an ideal place for, I would say, most patients, but especially for dancers and hypermobile dancers. And you want a doctor who's going to give you some lasting relief.

So if you, like I said before, if you are, you know, I have patients that say, well, I've been seeing a chiropractor twice a week for, you know, 5 years. It's like, well, are you getting any significant relief? You know, in some cases people have serious injuries that require— they're in chronic pain and they require care. I get that. But if I have a, you know, 12-year-old who's seeing chiropractor twice a week and not feeling any improvement after years, something's not working.

So, you know, I think that's a bit of a red flag. Like, I'm like, okay, you know, my patients, I use— I generally am seeing them 6 to 10 visits max. And then if they want to stay on for long-term, like, success of, like, you know, performance-based care, or how are we going to continue to help you manage chronic pain or dysfunction, we can do that. But, don't be signing up for those long, long-term care plans.

So I don't know. I think it's really hard to tell from someone's website or from what someone says because everyone, I think, says the right things, but a referral from someone who's experienced what a chiropractor offers and can speak directly to like, oh no, my chiropractor taught me a lot, I did exercises. Or if you're going to go in and interview someone or have a first visit, like, those are some things I would look for.

Dr. Carrie Skony: Well, and I think there is something too— you said, you know, you don't want to go to someone who's going to keep you coming back twice a week for 5 years. There is something too when we're working with elite athletes to maintenance care, and as you said, preventative care strengthening. I always encourage my dancers to start seeing a physical therapist before they have a serious issue so that when they have a serious issue, the person already knows their body and is like, that's not what you normally look like. That's not how you normally are.

So, I don't mind someone going in and seeing someone and getting help with, you know, some Achilles tendinopathy, which is not a small issue, but they think it is. But something small, and then being able to, to know that person. And I think that when we're working with elite athletes, there is going to be a degree of, of maintenance care. So high-level dancers, especially people with hypermobility, high-level athletes will be going to a physical therapist once a month, once every 2 months for just what we call tune-ups, because they are doing extraordinary things with their body, right?

So there is that component of it, but they shouldn't— it's like, a chiropractor that I didn't 100% agree with, tried to explain to me that it was like brushing your teeth, that you do go to the dentist to get your teeth cleaned too, even though you're capable of brushing your teeth, but you have to go to the dentist regularly. And I was like, yeah, but if I have to get my teeth cleaned twice a week, I'm clearly not doing something right at home, right? I shouldn't have to depend on the dentist to do that maintenance for me.

Dr. Carrie Skony: And here's the difference, and I think you pointed brought up this really well of like, listen, I, I want to be a guide for my patients. And once I have a patient, they generally are with me for a long time. It's just we need to be really clear about what my role is. You know, my role is to help you as new injuries appear, to teach you, to educate you, to treat them as they pop up. You know, I have people who have chronic Achilles tendonosis or ankle impingement. It's like, all right, we're going to treat that when that flares up. Like, that's, you know, I'm here. I'm not kicking you out. I'm not it's a bad thing that you need to come see me because certainly as an elite athlete, like you said, Jen, there's, there's things we need to treat.

The difference is, you know, what is our overall goal here? And are we working towards a functional improvement, structural improvements that are long lasting? And when I talk about, you know, not signing up for these like 2 times a week for the rest of your life kind of care, you know, I'm speaking specifically of like, it tends to just be offices that are just doing joint manipulation, you know, And so in my, you know, from my perspective, we need active care. And so if someone's coming to me and we're making objective progress and like, then yeah, absolutely stay.

I mean, my patients, I love my patients. I've seen patients all the way through their, you know, youth, pre-professional, into their professional careers and into retirement. You know, I've been in practice long enough that I've seen dancers on the whole spectrum and they stay with me and they trust me and I love that. But we're coming in with like, okay, we're sending clear goals of what we're trying to accomplish. And we're gonna be really intentional and personalized about how we're going to do that. This is not a cookie-cutter approach to just like get you out of pain today and tomorrow. Like, we have goals. Like, let's work on this. And we generally reach those goals, and then something else happens, or they have a flare-up, and they come back and we work on it again.

And my job is to just be a guide and a resource for them. They're doing the work. I'm helping them along the way. And I'm just, you know, I always say to my patients, like, Hey, you and me are in a rowboat. Like we both have an oar, you know, so we're both working. And if I'm the only one doing the work, we're going in circles. And if you're, you know, my goal is to eventually like hand you the oar. Like I'll jump back in the boat anytime you need me, but my job is to give you the oar so that you can go and do and take care of yourself. I don't want you to rely on me forever if you don't have to. I will be here if you need me.

and a lot of conditions need that. But like, my goal ultimately is to try to empower you to be able to self-care as best as possible and have the highest function and, you know, optimal health that we can.

Dr. Carrie Skony: That's gorgeous. And that was just like pure gold right there. I think I'm gonna put all of that on a pillow. Empowering someone to have both of the oars. I know we have— we've talked a lot about chiropractic care today, and I really appreciate your time. Was there anything that we— that you wanted to cover that we didn't get to today?

Dr. Carrie Skony: gosh, we covered a lot.

Dr. Carrie Skony: We did, right?

Dr. Carrie Skony: All of that.

Dr. Carrie Skony: I feel pretty good about us.

Dr. Carrie Skony: I would just say, you know, one of my passions that outside of chiropractic, I think one of my passions is just really like educating instructors. And I just, I know you guys feel this to the depths of you also, is just there's such a lack of education in our dance instructors about hypermobility that I really face this challenge on a daily basis. Of, you know, how can we, how can we get our instructors to help empower our students as well? And we can all get on the same page.

I'm really fortunate. We have a huge competitive dance community in the Chicago area. I work with, you know, probably a couple dozen dance studios. I'm a consulting physician for health issues at many studios. And I do have good relationships. But there's still a struggle sometimes, even with new teachers, the lack of like certification or knowledge about how to work with hypermobile dancers. And I think, you know, that would be my passion project, that we would continue to educate teachers about understanding hypermobile bodies.

I know you guys can agree to all of this, but knowing like, hey, you know, teachers could be used from the very young age of like being able to acknowledge like, yes, like you're a bendy, you're a bendy body. Like you don't have to diagnose that, but be able to acknowledge like, we're not going to push you into your end range of motion because that's not necessary, especially at 10 or 11 years old. You know, you can really empower kids at a young age instead of exploiting them. I guess that's maybe a bad word, but instead of, you know, encouraging like so-and-so can do all the tricks, so they're going to get all the tricks and all the dances, and we're going to use that to get points in all of our routines, and you can't— we can't afford to have you injured. So if you're hurting, I'm sorry, you still have to be a part of this. No one can do this role. And I think we set the stage for these young kids at a young, you know, at this young age that they have committed their bodies to this practice. Like, and it's, I think it's really irresponsible of us. And I think it starts with the teachers unknowingly, you know, I think it's all unknowingly. It's not on purpose. I just think education will go a long way.

I have dancers who don't get enough time to eat between classes. And we know hypermobile dancers need more time to digest. They can't eat as much food. Maybe they have more sensitive stomachs. And to lump our hypermobile dancers all together with the other population is such a disservice and harming to hypermobile bodies. And so when I see dancers come into my office, I think, oh, there's all these other factors that are contributing to your health and wellness that like, whoo, like I'm going to educate you on this and I'm going to advocate for you and I want you to advocate for yourself and I want your parents to advocate for you, and I'm gonna, I'm gonna educate your instructors.

But it's just like, man, if we could just get all these pieces together, you know, from the get-go and have everyone understand, like, okay, you know, a hypermobile body probably is going to complain of pain more. Like, that's not that uncommon. Let's not shame them or call them lazy if they ask if they can sit out, you know, they're having a bad joint day or pain. Like, let's not make them feel bad about that. We need to understand and like, okay, great. Yeah. Like, we want to preserve your body. We want you to function optimally. We want you as part of our team. We want you to be successful.

If that's what your body needs, your body needs more time to eat or you need more sleep or you need less, you know, hyperextension in your tricks and or less number of dances. And we want to provide that for you because we care about you holistically as a person and we want you to be successful. And I just don't see that all the time. It's a lot of like you know, gosh, you have so much talent. Let's put you in front and center. Let's make you do all the tricks. You know, let's take your leg, whack your leg over all the way over here.

Dr. Carrie Skony: And it's like, and you're irreplaceable.

Dr. Carrie Skony: Yes. And you're irreplaceable. And you're sure these kids feel— I mean, they're scared to bring it up. And it's just, yeah, you know, we are, we are on that same soapbox.

Dr. Carrie Skony: I guarantee you we are on that same soapbox.

Dr. Carrie Skony: We are working hard.

Dr. Carrie Skony: We are working hard to change it. We so appreciate your input and everything that you have to offer the dance world and being willing to have this conversation with us. Because when we first approached you, you were like, I'm not an expert on hypermobility, but we need an expert on chiropractic who works with dancers in a way that aligns with what we think should be happening and works with hypermobility. And you certainly have helped us understand all of that today. So if people want to learn more about you, where can they find you?

Dr. Carrie Skony: Let's hear it. I'm on social media, Instagram and Facebook at @DrCarrieSkony, D-R, Carrie, C-A-R-R-I-E, S-K-O-N-Y. And my website is performactivewellness.com. They can find me there, leave me messages.

Dr. Carrie Skony: Awesome. That's great. And we'll have the contact info in the show notes as well. so people can look at that as well. Well, you have been listening to Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD. And our guest today is Dr. Carrie Skony, certified chiropractic sports physician and owner of Perform Active Wellness Dance Medicine. Carrie, thank you so much for chatting with us today. It was a pleasure to have you here.

Dr. Carrie Skony: Thank you guys. I love what you're doing. Keep up the hard work. Thanks.

Dr. Carrie Skony: Thank you so much. We really appreciate you coming on today.

Dr. Carrie Skony: Of course.

Dr. Carrie Skony: If you love what you learned, follow the Bendy Bodies Podcast to avoid missing future episodes. Screenshot this episode tagging us in your story so we can connect. Our website is www.bendybodies.org and follow us on Instagram @bendy_bodies. We love seeing your posts and stories, so please tag us using #bendybody. Please leave a review and share the podcast to help us spread the word about hypermobility and associated conditions.

This information is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease. The information shared is for educational purposes only and is not a substitute for medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Please refer to your local qualified health practitioner for all medical concerns. We will catch you next time on the Bendy Bodies Podcast.
