---
num: 77
title: >-
  77. Neurosurgical Insights from Paolo Bolognese, MD and Guest Cohost Pradeep
  Chopra, MD
date: '2023-11-02'
duration: 2h 14m
description: "In this episode, YOUR guest is neurosurgeon, Paolo Bolognese, MD, founder of the Chiari Neurosurgical Center in New York.\_ Dr. Bolognese is also on the Board of Directors of the American Syringomyelia & Chiari Alliance Project, Inc. (ASAP), on the Scientific Education and Advisory Board of the Chiari Syringomyelia Foundation (CSF), and is a member of the International Consortium on EDS, HSD, and Related Disorders. The Chiari EDS Center is focused on the diagnosis and treatment of Chiari I Malformation, Syringomyelia, Craniocervical Instability, Tethered Cord, Eagle Syndrome, Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension, and Intracranial Hypotension.\_ Dr Bolognese’s surgical experience includes more than 1,600 Chiari Decompressions and 900 Craniocervical Fusions, 300 of which with condylar screws.\_ He is on the Board of the main national and international organizations focused on Chiari and Syringomyelia and has also made contributions in the field of Intraoperative Ultrasound and Laser Doppler Flowmetry.\nYOUR guest co-host is Pradeep Chopra, MD, Harvard-trained anesthesiologist double Board Certified in Pain Management and Anesthesiology, Director of the Center for Complex Conditions and Assistant Professor, Brown Medical School with a special interest in chronic complex pain conditions and their associated co-existing conditions. \nYOUR host, as always, is Dr. Linda Bluestein, the Hypermobility MD.\_Explored in this episode:· \_ How Dr Bolognese discovered the link between Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes (EDS) and Chiari I malformation · \_ Why people with EDS are at increased risk of craniocervical instability· \_ What type of imaging he prefers for the evaluation of Chiari I malformation and/or cervical instability · \_ Why he started performing surgery for Eagle’s Syndrome · \_ Why he feels invasive cervical traction is an essential part of the neurosurgical evaluation for upper cervical spine problems· \_ Causes of elevated intracranial pressure\n\_This episode is really special as it is rare to get a neurosurgeon's point of view outside of a medical appointment.\_ It may be easier for you to have the transcript in front of you while you are watching this episode of the Bendy Bodies Podcast on our YouTube channel or listening to this episode on your favorite podcast player.\_ Dr. Bolognese uses his hands a lot for demonstration so you may find watching this episode on YouTube beneficial.\nThis important conversation about neurosurgical problems will leave you feeling hopeful, prepared to tackle that next step, with a better understanding of the multitude of factors that can impact symptoms.\_ \nConnect with YOUR Bendy Specialist, Linda Bluestein, MD!"
tags:
  - EDS
  - Pain
  - Diagnosis
  - Treatment
  - Surgery
  - Hypermobility
audioUrl: >-
  https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH9028642091.mp3?updated=1721669959
videoUrl: 'https://youtu.be/d9A1aJB5GRo'
snippets: []
guests:
  - Dr. Pradeep Chopra
  - 'Paolo Bolognese, MD'
guestImages: []
---
[00:24] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Welcome back, every bendy body. This is the Bendy Bodies Podcast, and I'm your host and founder, Dr. Linda Bluestein, the Hypermobility MD. This is going to be a great episode, so be sure to stick around until the very end so you don't miss any of our special hypermobility hacks. As always, this information is for educational purposes only and is not a substitute for personalized medical advice. Before I introduce your guest, I would like to reintroduce you to my colleague and friend, Dr. Pradeep Chopra, who will be your guest co-host for this episode. Dr. Chopra is a pain management expert who specializes in complex pain conditions and has been a guest multiple times on the Bendy Bodies podcast. Be sure to check out those episodes if you have not heard them already. Dr. Chopra, hello and welcome back to Bendy Bodies.

[01:34] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Hello, Dr. Bluestein and Dr. Bolognese. My pleasure to be here once again.

[01:41] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wonderful. And could you introduce our special guest for us?

[01:46] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yes, our very special guest for us today is the wonderful Dr. Paolo Bolognese. He is a neurosurgeon. He is a founder of the Chiari Neurosurgical Center in New York. Dr. Bolognese is also on the board of directors of the American Syringomyelia and Chiari Alliance Project, Inc. He is also on the scientific education and advisory board of the Chiari Syringomyelia Foundation and a member of the International Consortium on EDS, HSD, and Related Disorders. The Chiari EDS Center is focused on the diagnosis and treatment of Chiari 1 malformation, syringomyelia, craniosacral instability, tethered cord, Eagle syndrome, idiopathic intracranial hypertension, and intracranial hypotension. That's a lot of work you do.

[02:51] Paolo Bolognese, MD: I know that. I'm tired already.

[02:54] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Dr. Bolognese's surgical experience includes more than 1,600 Chiari decompressions and 900 craniosacral fusions, 300 of which with condylar screws. He's also on the board of the main national and international organizations focused on Chiari and syringomyelia. And has also made contributions in the field of intraoperative ultrasound and laser Doppler flowmetry. I have no idea what that is, but sounds really fantastic.

[03:36] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Thank you very much.

[03:38] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Dr. Bolognese, hello and welcome to Bendy Bodies.

[03:43] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Thank you for having me here. I'm very, very glad to be here.

[03:46] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, wonderful. We are thrilled to chat with you. And if you could start out by telling us briefly how you became interested in EDS and related conditions?

[03:55] Paolo Bolognese, MD: It was a total accident. I came to the United States, I retrained again, and the chairman who trained me decided to take me when he left his former hospital. So he wanted to start the Chiari 1 Malformation Center, and at that point, you know, there were just a few cases done nationwide. So the fact of having two neurosurgeons building a center together was kind of like building a Yankee Stadium and you just have a couple of kids from the neighborhood going and playing. Did not make sense. What we did not know is that we were ahead of the curve of a big wave of incoming cases, which were newly diagnosed by MRI and by patient awareness. So long story short, we're having this Chiari Center, and we're operating together. I was seeing the outpatients, and I was seeing several patients in a day. And several for Chiari surgery means 6 in a day. And all of a sudden I see that 2 of them had Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. And then the following time I was seeing patients, I saw another 2. And then the following week, I found another 4. And, you know, just like it—what were the chances for these things just to be associated by sheer chance? So I went to him and I said, you know, I think that there is something strange here. I found it too many times. It was, you know, he gave me a dose of healthy skepticism, you know, like, because he was the older guy and I was the younger guy. And then one month later, I went back to him and I said, listen, you know, there is definitely—it is—I keep seeing it, so it is not an accident. And he was again skeptic. And by the 89th patient over a few months, I made an Excel file for him and I showed him, okay, so we have patients who are younger, the ratio between women and men is instead of 3:1, it's 9:1. They have a different phenotype, they're younger, they have different other comorbidities. And, you know, and they tend to have all these things about which, you know, we know just to remember a couple of footnotes from school. Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome was not really a main thing in education in medical school. So, you know, at that point, he picked up the phone and he called the geneticist from Duke, who was the international leader in the field of genetics of Chiari. And she says, you know, never heard it myself, but statistically, you have seen this many Chiari, this many EDS, the chances for this to be chance alone were, I don't remember how many, several millions to one. And so he picks up the phone and he calls the person in charge for connective tissue disorders. And that person was Claire Francomano. And Claire Francomano was the director of Department of Aging, which is practically connective tissue disorder and all those things. And all of a sudden, it was bizarre because all of a sudden we were all, 4 of us are giddy because we're completing each other's sentences. So all of a sudden we are, you know, kind of there is this chemistry instantaneously because they were having pieces that, and vice versa. So they could not explain why there are so many neurological problems in their EDS patients. On the other end, we're not, you know, we're simply ignorant about what, probably we should have opened a textbook before talking to them. But at that point, it was natural for us to start cooperating. And so that's how we started.

You worked on this for some more years than us. We're kind of, we're so not ahead because we're smart. We just stumbled into that. And so we couldn't call anybody and we started doing surgeries and then we learned the hard way by getting eggs on our face, what was working and especially what was not working technically by applying the standard technique that we knew about. And so we started going to national meetings, we started talking about Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and nobody bought into it. So for years actually, we were told, you know, like I don't think that that's that. The usual reaction of other colleagues, which was obvious, was, you know, I never seen a patient with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome my entire career among the Chiari population. So the next person coming on the scene was Dr. Henderson. Dr. Henderson had, like me, had a kind of a strange career because he was coming from Australia and, like me, went in the military as part of the regular draft. Before coming to the United States, he made a stop in London in a place called Queen Square. And Queen Square at that point was the center of the world for everything which was related to craniocervical instability. Not because of EDS at that point, but because the old British ladies were developing this strange disease called rheumatoid arthritis, which is a sort of an inflammatory reaction which attacks the joint. But instead of making just the ligaments weak, it creates an inflammatory mass called the pannus, which compresses and pushes things around. So he was there, and he was trained by the god of craniosacral instability called Krokart. So when he came to the United States shortly afterwards, he had the same reaction. He said, all right, I studied craniosacral instability. I know how to do craniosacral fusion much more than an average neurosurgeon in the States. I understand the point because I've seen enough people with destruction of the joint. So I understand the point. I'm going to start going ahead. So all of a sudden we were two hospitals starting working on that. Now all of a sudden, you know, a lot more and more patients starting coming over, and at the beginning was Chiari 1 malformation and craniosacral instability looks like a comorbidity, so it is what we call now complex Chiari, which means that the Chiari is now—the surgical management is rendered more complicated by the fact that the joint is defective. But the very first time that we met the patient was pure EDS was the following year, was in 2002, after the first time that we observed. And there was this girl that now, you know, would check all the boxes for the 3 of us, you know, very debilitated, age 17, 3 to 4 years of progressive debilitation, unable to get out of the wheelchair. Nobody sees anything. Nobody is all in your head. You know, this is the usual routine. And the mother who had gone anywhere, she came to us because she thought that maybe as a form of Chiari 1 malformation. She came there, she checked everything else, and I look at the MRI, and MRI was kind of some shade of gray, but was more towards in the shade of grays between full Chiari and normal, was more in the left side of the spectrum than normal. But I was seeing this patient was really sick, so I don't know what happened, you know, I got up, I went around the table because I really did not know what to call, and I grabbed her head and I pulled it up, and all of a sudden she woke up and she perked up. She was able to move around. She was able to swallow. And then I let it down and she went back to where she was. So I did 5, 6 times. The mother was all excited because she hadn't seen it that way, even for a few seconds, for 4 or 5 years. So I went back to Milorad, you know, my mentor. I told him, listen, this is a kind of a black box scenario. I do not know what's inside, neither you do, because right now the MRI looks normal-ish. There is no Chiari 1 malformation, there is no retroflexodontia, there is nothing. But every time I pull her up, she feels better. Every time I let her go, she feels worse. So it looks some kind of craniocervical pathology resembling cranial settling, like settling of a house on the foundation, right? Don't understand how it is, but if we make it like this it feels better, we can do a fusion. So at that point, there was already a jump from the complex Chiari, which the MRI was self-evident, to a scenario we have now, pure neuro-EDS with instability, in which the patient had a normal MRI, but the big clinical change, much more than a Chiari malformation by itself. So, you know, like Milorad had the courage, professional courage to say, because at one time he's a young punk, at that point was 42, not so young, but I was still a young punk compared to him. And I was saying, oh yeah, like we can do this. He could have said, you know, the heck we're gonna do it. I'm going to have half of the neurosurgical community after me. And instead he said, you know, I see the same. And so we had her coming back, we did a fusion, and now we know that it's not a surprise for us. Back then it was the hell of a surprise to see that she went well. And then not only she went well, but her story was kind of like a Cinderella story. She ended up becoming a supermodel for the Ford agency in New York City. And she stayed there, became a high-end supermodel international for 4 or 5 years. Then she got married and now I'm uncle for the third time. She's—every time a baby is born, she sends me pictures. So these were kind of two different paths. And so those are the second patient who was so kind of the Rosetta Stone of neuro-EDS. It was the step forward from just the Chiari EDS. And then at that point all the problems began. The problems are diagnostic and the problems are technical surgery. And they start here at that point, like when do you call it? How do you call it? How do you grade it, what kind of workup you do rather than just shooting from the hip? Practically to create, you know, science is always something that keeps going, sometimes accelerating, sometimes stagnating. And when there is no book to read, you just find out.

[16:03] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: You write the book. In that case, you write the book.

[16:08] Paolo Bolognese, MD: You know, like some chapters you discover afterwards that you write them, and then in retrospect, they're tested by time and they say, okay, you have to do these other things instead, you know, like, but you're always between the fog of war, the perspective, etc. You're always as smart as the last lesson you learned. What we did not understand at that point was that, again, being ignorant and having nobody to ask was that the problem was way more complex than we were anticipating. The neuro-EDS model was, was, we were having so many additional pieces that we're still finding out. And so then the diagnostic, about again how to assemble a workup which makes sense, and on one side and on the other, because there is a balance. One, you cannot be so zealot that you say, okay, it is what it is, I'm going to operate on it. You have to have some criteria. The concept of the criteria is that you have to be rigid and flexible at the same time, right? You have to be flexible about the idea strategically that the criteria that you have today could evolve over time, but you have to be rigid tactically. So the version 3.1 or the set of criteria you have now, that's the line in the sand and you do not pass, you do not do a mulligan and you push it on the other side when nobody looks, because then otherwise you're not going to have a hard ground to stand on when you look back and you make an evaluation or the version 3.1, when you discover there are some limits and then you do the version 4.0. You know, and then there were all the problems which are purely technical about the surgery. Okay, you have a surgery that works for any other things, you do it, and then you discover afterwards again what works, but especially what doesn't work, and you move forward.

[18:25] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So it's a long answer as usual, but that was a great story because we wanted to know how you began, and it looks like you and Dr. Henderson were the pioneers in this field. And it's not any—and I mean, even today, after all these years, we're still learning and understanding the nuances of EDS. And you were in the middle of the—I mean, the spine itself, even without EDS, is such a complex structure. And even in the spine, the cervical spine is probably the most complex structure. You know, it balances a heavy head and you were the pioneers in this surgery. So the question that I have is that, you know, if I suspect somebody has, a patient with EDS has CCI, cranial cervical instability, or Chiari malformation, and I say, Hey, listen, I want you to see Dr. Bolognese. What is your process of evaluation? How do you start? So our listeners want to know, like, how do you evaluate them?

[19:46] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Okay. Again, what I have, the version that we have now is the current permutation of all the things we have done over the years. And the good thing for me in terms of mentality is that I had 3 mentors, which is like extremely lucky for somebody to have. And the mentor who had the biggest influence over me was Milorad. Milorad was OCD to the core, and he was just—he was never focused on—yeah, it is like the shepherd that has 99 sheep and they're all fine and he's okay, but he loses his sleep over the one sheep that is lost or if he's struggling or whatever. And every time I was saying, okay, so, you know, textbook says that the complication rate for this is good, we're better, so we're fine. He said I know it's not good enough. Give me an idea. Like the Chiari 1 malformation surgery back in the '80s had a solid 50% complication rate. So when we went down to, you know, like around 10% of complication rate or whatever, it was an enormous improvement. Obviously comes from, you know, it's not being genius, like tying your shoes, you do it over and over and you push yourself and it's inevitable you're gonna get to better numbers. But, and I was saying like 10%, much better. And he was saying, no, it's not good enough. And one of them was the most important complication was cerebrospinal fluid leakage for a number of different reasons. So we went down to 3% and it was still not good enough. And then we went down to 0.3%. And at that point, all right, just statistically it's going to be a little bit difficult to go lower down. And so he was always pushing. So we're, and again, going through the other direction, which is not only diagnostic. The issue is not so much how many times you have it correct with your procedure, but how many false negatives and false positives you have. And you do not realize the false negatives you realize later on when, you know, either somebody else operates or you change your criteria and stuff. This was negative before, but I was wrong. But the false positives are the most important in terms of overall reputation and overall, you know, problems for the for an evolving discipline or subdiscipline, because a false positive is going to potentially translate in a surgery. So at that point, you have a surgery that has not worked for—can be because of poor selection or poor execution of a technique that you know, but you did not execute it correctly, or simply because the surgery was indicated, was correctly executed, but that technique is not enough and you had to resort to something different that is not in the book yet. So when you—after the first 5 or 6 years, we're already having, you know, something like 300 cases. And we're all excited because, okay, this is a new, you know, craniocervical instability is not an unknown pathology, but linked to EDS to that degree and with those connotations was something new. So we're excited about, we're going to do 300 and then we're going to report it. We're going to wait some years because you cannot just do the surgery and say, okay, we observe for 3 months and we're fine. No, you have to kind of have a good post-op follow-up. And we look at that and the complication rate was higher than the standard, for example, trauma or other pathologies like congenital in children. Not enormously higher, but higher enough that the implication was if we publish, you know, we're not gonna look great. And so also the pathology is not gonna look that great. It's not gonna get a good reputation because it kind of can sound disingenuous. They say, yeah, we had 10 times more the next level disease in this patient, but it's not us. It's not because of us. It's because of the pathology. You know, a reviewer looks into that, is like, yeah, right, we're not going to publish it. So at that point, we did not publish intentionally the first hundreds of cases we did that we did with the butt plate, because they were not, you know, in order for something to be credible, you had to have at least the same outcome and the same complication rate of a conventional technique, conventional pathology, and then you can sell the new pathology for what it is. But anyway, like, going—I took a detour. What is the—so we had the same problem about the diagnosis. The beginning was, okay, you pull the head up and you look at the MRI, looks normal-ish, your patient's EDS, and that was pretty much it. And so over the years we added more and more. So what is the situation now? The situation now is that we have an approach which is multi-legged, or kind of a puzzle, and we pass in a situation in which the patient comes to be evaluated, already pre-screened by somebody else, and we raise a level of suspicion before we send them to trial. It's like you are the DA and you listen to the police, you look at the body of evidence to see if somebody qualified to be indicted and be sent to trial. So we look at clinical history, provocative testing, radiology, and diagnostic trial. So the clinical is simple. You know, there is a series of symptoms which are typical of every anatomical region. So if you have a sore, you know, a broken ankle, you're going to be limping around. If you're going to have a bad stomach, you're going to have problems digesting. So there is a lot, a lot of cables and structures passing in the craniocervical junction. So there's going to be a long list of signs and symptoms. Those are not exclusive of craniocervical instability, but they are linked to the region. So if you have a trauma, a tumor, a congenital malformation, or neuro-EDS affecting there, you're going to have the same symptoms with different kind of severity, different kind of grouping, etc. But if you look at the list, you're going to see that that list becomes hot in the sense of how many positives you're going to have. So that's number one. Number 2 is provocative testing. So it is like if I have a broken arm and I will go like this, even if the two stumps are aligned, but I do like this, the patient is going to complain. So it's like kicking a tire. You play with the joint. And if the patient's chief complaints and the symptoms of this area get worse or better respectively, that means that you are onto something for that. So that's number 2. Number 3 is the history. So if somebody, for example, has, you know, is already flexible before, one time falls on the head and twists the neck and all the symptoms start afterwards, is one of the many parameters. Now recently, for example, we're seeing a lot of patients coming up with deteriorating EDS or a sort of acquired form of EDS in long COVID patients, with the long COVID kind of pushing the people over the edge. We've seen it with a lot of tropical diseases. So the history now is the third thing. The fourth one is morphometrics. You know, the majority of these patients, when they come in, they do not have so much in terms of radiology. So there is a big asymmetry between the chief complaints, which are devastating. Quality of life is poor, and neurological exam quite often is normal-ish. So you don't have so much of a massive, you know, the massive hyperreflexia or clonus you can find some patients. Most of the times the neuro exam is—the signs are less than the symptoms, and the quality of life is enormously out of proportion with what the MRI presentation is. So what we use at that point is the morphometrics, and all the morphometrics which were available at that point were for trauma, and there were about 18 parameters. Notably, the Grabb or PADI did not exist yet, was introduced a few years later, but there were 18 parameters back then. And the only principle was whatever parameter you use, you cannot just use one, you have to use two for the sole principle. The sole principle is you look at the sole of the fish like this, looks like gigantic, like this, it looks different. So you have to have at least two complementary parameters to make an evaluation. Otherwise you're going to have too many false positives, too many false negatives. So we tested for, during invasive cervical traction, a bunch of these, and we discovered that, um, he was coming to us with these 18 parameters, and we're working together, and we are having an understanding about what was abnormal with the pathophysiology of the joint down to the levels which were extremely sophisticated. But it was very counterproductive in terms of screening. So we boiled it down to 3 parameters, which then became 4 after the addition of the Grabb. So certain things we noticed that were not really that helpful, like the power ratio, for example, the SDS, or the Chamberlain line, et cetera. But others which were more helpful than usual. So what we're doing now, we're using these 4 parameters. Go ahead.

[31:20] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Dr. Bolognese, just one question. For our listeners, when you say morphometric measurements, you mean measurements on the MRI, the angles that we are talking about, right?

[31:34] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Yeah, it is almost correct in the sense that the morphometrics are measurements of distances, angles, or areas, or volumes that you can perform on different neuroimaging media. Otherwise, we get an MRI in supine, high definition, and we start doing the first set of 4 parameters. Um, then the 5th one is the diagnostic trial. Diagnostic trial means, uh, let's have somebody having repeated trials of traction at home or wearing a collar for a certain amount of days at home. And then if they have it, it is like turning a switch on and off all the time. If you have a consistent help every time you do certain maneuvers and you go back to square one when you remove the collar or you remove the traction, fine. At that point we have 5 points. Sometimes all 5 are positive, sometimes 4 are positive, 1 is negative, but you raise a sort of a body of evidence to have a level of suspicion. But at that point, we don't finalize the diagnosis at the surgical level, which means, you know, for anybody who's a neurologist or a pain specialist, etc., that is enough just to say, okay, you have EDS, you have neuro-EDS, and you have a problem with craniocervical junction. There is nothing wrong with that. But if somebody is referred to a surgeon, it's the responsibility of the surgeon to go to the Supreme Court before you start labeling somebody with that, because as a neurosurgeon, the diagnosis has a heavier connotation. So at that point, we decided to have the test of invasive cervical traction. The beginning was just like, all right, so if the patient does the traction at home, who tells us they're doing it the right way? Sometimes they put in this leg like this, or knee like this. Sometimes they have a bull neck. Sometimes they have a short mandible. So we just want to do something in the last minute before doing the surgery that confirms indeed that we can see with our eyes. And then we start adding the morphometrics to that. And then we reach the conclusion that of giving scores. So again, first we have the pre-screening by the local physician or the EDS specialist comes to us. We put those 5 points together and then we say, okay, now you qualify. Most likely you have this, but you qualify for verification. So our standard of giving the diagnosis, you have to pass this test. So they come, they do the test, and with the test we give scores. The scores are two: one is clinical and one is radiological. The clinical is it does not matter that at that point we already know that pulling your head up is going to make you feel better. We just want to do it under standard condition, but what's important next, since they're coming to a neurosurgeon, is fine, you did this diagnosis most likely, but do you pass a certain threshold of severity, yes or no? So what we consider the patient as having a positive clinical score when the chief complaints improve by at least 75% from the baseline when off traction in the sitting position. So at the end of the test, if they have a test, you know, the chief complaints improved by 80%, at that point they have a severe craniocervical instability, at least with that they have a positive clinical score. Then yet, in order to have a positive test, they also have to have a positive radiological score. The reason is this, as you know very well, there are a lot of people with EDS out there who have no symptoms. They are excellent, you know, ballerinas, they're phenomenal track and fielders, they get the gold for gymnastics for the U.S. Olympic team. So that's a demonstration that EDS is also an evolutionary mutation which has brought advantages but becomes a medical problem when somebody falls off the cliff and they think they compensate. So the same things which make these people amazing, you know, skin which makes them look younger than what they are until a late age, phenomenally attractive because the skeletal features are those, you know, demigods on earth, both men and women, and athletic performances which are superior because of the way their tissues are, you know, these are the captain of the football team and the drum major from, you know, in the homecoming queen. Those are the people who are the idols. But if things start going in the wrong direction, they become our patients. So, you know, like if you have somebody who's hypermobile, who cares? So if you can have just a very positive morphometric change of certain parameters, that doesn't mean you're unstable. That means that you are hypermobile unless you also have a positive clinical score. So if you have a positive clinical score above a certain 75% of improvement and you have movements which are above the normal. But, you know, defined normal for the normal people, not normal for EDS. At that point, if you have the two together, at that point the invasive cervical traction is positive, and then we move on. Another thing is that if the patient at 35 pounds feels great and they're happy, they're kind of joyful—more recently, for the last year or so, when they're really happy since they're going to go back down and, you know, and be unhappy and with their brain fog when we remove the traction. When they are their happiest, I give them my phone and I have them calling their relatives and we take pictures, take videos. So whatever happens, they describe, you know, from the inside, they're always very touching.

[38:22] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So like, is that the, is that what is called the Jesus moment?

[38:26] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Yeah, you know, because you can have also the patient that kind of wants to have it, you know, and they come in, whatever, and they tell you the song and the dance like you've seen very often in the office. Oh yes, I have this, but nothing wrong there. They can be hypermobile, yes, whatever, but they're convinced they have craniocervical instability. So these people, you go up and they say, how's the improvement? And they say, yeah, it is 80% because they heard the thing. But you see on their face, the people who really have the 80%, oh my God, it was not like this for the last 5 years. Remember there was this mother who was having phonophobia, so she could not, she was going around with noise canceling things. And she's in traction at 35 pounds. We removed it. She came with the sunglasses and the noise canceling. We remove everything. She look in the surgical, you know, surgical lights and we have a boombox, put it to the max and she can tolerate. All of a sudden she starts crying and she says, I'm so happy now I can listen to music with my daughter. You know, this kind of things you cannot fabricate. On the other hand, the person who's really not convinced is gonna tell you, yeah, yeah, I think it's 80%. You know that they don't have it even if they want to have it, right?

[40:05] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So you gave a couple of examples of clinical signs and symptoms that people are presenting with. And I think people are probably listening to this and chomping at the bit and going, Wait, what are some of the other symptoms that people would be presenting with that you're looking for that 75% or 80% improvement? Could you share some more of those examples?

[40:28] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Yeah, it's actually one of those things that you start with is like eating cherries, and then you discover that things are way more complex than you were anticipating. For example, we were having patients that they were coming in and they were having improvement to the symptoms. And at that point you ask yourself, okay, how much is coming from there and how much is coming from another mechanism? Okay, for example, you pull your head up, good, great, and you can affect the instability, but you can also affect, in certain conditions, the jugular outflow coming out to the skull. Okay. So how you demonstrate one or the other? So at that point, we added another piece. Another piece was this: there are certain signs, neurological signs, which come from the lower part of the brainstem. For example, one is the coordination of swallowing comes from the lower part of the brainstem and involves a number of cranial nerves. And it takes about 14 different movements coordinated in specific order for stuff to go from the mouth to the esophagus and goes on its own. And they're quite complex. The things which are not which are a little bit counterintuitive, is that the swallowing of the solids and the swallowing of the liquids are not the same. And the swallowing of the solids, they tend to be pathologic mostly for mechanical problems, like you have a cancer in the neck, or you have a hematoma, etc., or simply somebody is doing like this to you, you cannot really swallow a piece of bread. But pushing down a piece of solid food is actually relatively an easy task for all the muscles and the nerves. On the other hand, swallowing liquids, which will look like, okay, you pour down, is easy, is actually the most complicated. It requires a lot of things. It's the difference of you have, you know, like one of my grandfathers was an intellectual, the other was a farmer. So I'm gonna go with the farmer right now. It is like you have to go through a gate with 1 cow or with 25 sheep or 25 cats would be probably better. So the cow, it just beat him on the ass and it's gonna go in that direction. It's just 1. But if he had 25 little animals, it's gonna be a thing. The liquid is going to be more like the 25 cats that really need to be, or 25 sheep, really need to be directed specifically. So dysphagia for liquids is a typical neurological problem coming from, which can be pinpointed among one of the many things, because if I cut the glossopharyngeal, obviously later on, but everything converges to the lower brainstem. The second thing which is there is breathing. So automatic breathing and all the regulation thereof, they're integrated in the brainstem as well, in the lower part. Then there is a third one, which is the vision, but not so much vision acuity, but vision coordination. So there is the medial longitudinal fasciculus, it extends throughout a big chunk, big section of the brainstem, is mostly central, and allows us, you know, to keep us focused with our—no matter what we're doing with our neck, no matter what we're doing with our eyes, no matter what the target is doing, no matter if we are in a car and the target is moving on a walking on the, you know, on the sidewalk in the opposite direction, usually when I want to be buffoon, I tell the patients, okay, so imagine that you are in the car and you're driving this direction. All of a sudden there is Brad Pitt, because most patients, and he's walking in there. You want to look at him and looking very, very well, and for that image to be burnt inside your brain. So you don't want to—you would be disappointed to have a blurry or a jumpy picture. So at that point, the medial longitudinal fasciculus works in overdrive. So we put these 3 symptoms at the bottom of our list of the chief complaints. So now we're going to have 2 different scenarios: one in which the patient improves in everything, okay? Then the other in which you have the chief complaints do not improve, but the brainstem symptoms do, and then the vice versa. So now you realize that you have a different kind of way of understanding. So the first scenario, in which everything goes, gives you a higher level of confidence that not only the traction is making the chief complaints better, but since it would be at that point very, very difficult for all these things, including chief complaints, which should be part of the clinical list of the things which could come from the brainstem, plus those 3 selected things we're testing at that point, you know, it becomes more difficult to explain that these things are not coming from the brainstem, that they're actually coming from the brainstem being manipulated by the interaction. On the other hand, if the symptoms improve, the chief complaints improve, but the brainstem markers don't, at that point you can have some kind of a level of a doubt of, I'm not that convinced that it is coming from there. At that point, you put the brake on before you give, you know, the housekeeper seal of approval, the, you know, of craniocervical instability is told by a neurosurgeon, and now I give you also the golden ticket for the surgery if you want, you know. So, all these things are observations that you kind of see a number of times, then finally come from unconscious to conscious, and then you build a system around it. Now, it's still going to be the permutation I'm going to use when 3 years from now, I do not know, but right now it makes sense to me, because the major problem is not so much—yeah, you have to keep it. Even when you're enthusiastic about what you're doing, about, and you're all sold and invested in the disease, you have to be very skeptic for the individual patient. So every time you have to be, you have to be, I'm not saying in love, but obviously all the 3 of us and many others there were already convinced the neuro-EDS can affect the craniocervical instability. But it is much better for the cause if we are skeptic and dragging our feet, especially when—if the surgery is a potential end for the individual patient. So again, strategy being optimistic, but tactical level for the individual patient to be the opposite. And that's what with a kind of strange forced into my head. Otherwise I would've been just, yeah, let's go another one. Come on, let's go.

[48:21] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So Dr. Bolognese, one of the questions that we as practitioners get a lot is, oh my God, invasive cervical traction. Sounds invasive. And can you tell our listeners, like, number one, I mean, you explained to us why you do invasive cervical traction, and that was a very great, good explanation. But they also worry that, is it painful? Is it difficult? And how like, they want to know a little bit more about, is it a painful procedure?

[49:09] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Okay, the first thing that I'm going to say is a little bit tongue-in-cheek, which is this: the best selection is to put a high bar to discourage the faint-hearted. And I'm saying like this, you know, obviously there is a funnel going towards a neurosurgical specialty. So if I, or the other people who are in my field, if we're seeing every single neuro-EDS with any degree of instability, we wouldn't do anything else, wouldn't have the time to operate, etc. So it is good Israel, it is like you're waiting in line and there are a lot of people who are kind of wasting your time. If you are a patient who really needs surgery, is really sick, if there are 99 patients ahead of them to see your surgeon XYZ, that they have mild degree of the disease, you know, that's a delay of care for the poor devil who's in. So it makes sense for us to have scary things outside of the door. So the people who really have mild degree of the disease, they think twice. On the other hand, the people who are really sick, they're going to tell you, you know, it doesn't matter. You have to cut my arm, cut my arm. I have enough with this. I'm so sick. Fine. You get to resist the temptation of cutting their arm to make them happy. But if you have, if somebody is squeamish about the idea about having invasive testing, which is for their own help of avoiding a potentially unnecessary surgery, and they're squeamish about coming, good, that's already a selection done, okay, of a big chunk of people. So I do not intentionally, I do not want to downplay the teasing. Oh, it's not really invasive, it's just—no, it's invasive, period. You know, you have two pins which are going through the skin in the outer layers of the scalp. Take it or leave it. But that said, there are other things. One is the fact that we are doing the test and other surgeons who are in the field, they're not doing the test automatically means that that is not—if we are right and they're wrong, or this is the standard, or vice versa, this is not the standard, just a waste of time. This makes sense for us. At this point of our journey for all the things we have done for the last 23 years. Period. That said, in a polite way, it's either this way or the highway. You know, like, if you do not want to do the traction, ends there. So like, don't try to come brownbeat me with 500 emails per day. Oh, can I skip the invasive traction and go straight for the surgery? The answer is no. And I respect that. Fine is your decision. The test is elective. So, but without a positive test, without, not only without doing the test and a positive result of the test, the surgery is never going to be an option from our part. All right. So that was the thing. Then how is the test done? The patient comes in the operating room. And we give him MAC anesthesia and local anesthetic. So MAC anesthesia is like going for a colonoscopy.

[52:52] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Twilight sedation.

[52:53] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Yeah, you know. And the reason why we give MAC is that we don't want any kind of other medications like fentanyl versus whatever to make the patient better or to make the patient sleepy. We want the patient fully awake when he comes back from protocol. Probably is easily reversible. And then we also give local. Now we all know that maybe some patients doesn't know by now, but if you use just lidocaine, it does not work. But if you use a mix of lidocaine and Marcaine for any kind of procedure, including a dentist, it works much better. Certain patients, you put lidocaine and it is like you're not giving anything at all. And we also use a little touch of epinephrine unless there are contraindications, because that prolongs the use of the local anesthetic. So by that time, the patient is asleep with local anesthetic. And once they—the secret of any kind of hardware in the body, wherever you put it, internal, external, whatever, is that once you put something attached to a bone, and that piece of hardware is fixed and stable and doesn't move, you can pull the patient up like this, like a pail of water, and it's nothing. It's like they don't feel anything. The problem starts if you do not put it tight enough. If you don't put it tight, it becomes loose. At that point, it hurts automatically. How much is too much? How much is too little? It hurts. So that's kind of routine. Then we wake him up. We just wait for the MAC anesthesia to wear off, and then we start. About applying the traction and whatever, we go up to 35 pounds for cases of broken, you know, when you have a broken jump facet or whatever, any post-traumatic. You go up to 50, 60, you know, nothing gets broken there. 35 is a safe level for our patient population to do the things we need to do. Now, there is the issue of the fact that this is not a therapeutic procedure. So if you feel better during the traction, guess what? When we remove the traction, you go back to square one. So if the patient says, oh, I tried the home traction doesn't work because once I remove it, the symptoms come back. First of all, you should read the instructions we send you, but he's kind of expecting too much from a diagnostic test. He's like, I tried that, you know, I tried this test, but, you know, cancer came back afterwards. Yeah, that's not therapy. That's just doing a biopsy to get some tumor cells out to make a test. Doesn't cure your cancer. So that's the same kind of reasoning. The issue is that some patients can have rebounds, and actually the rebound, which some patients say, ah, you know, it didn't—not only did not work, the symptoms came back, but for the first even non-invasive traction, my symptoms were worse for a few hours afterwards. That actually is a sign that you are very unstable, that you're on the right side of the spectrum. So when somebody tells me, I tried non-invasive traction at home and I had rebound, I already know that the patient is going to be positive on the ICT. So a rebound after the invasive cervical traction is going to be quite intense, but we keep the patient in the hospital for hours afterwards. So if they are in pain, guess what? You can—anesthesia is there, they can shoot you with something, something you cannot have in the comfort of your own home. Then there is the overall complications. We do something like between 2 and 4 invasive cervical tractions per week. We've been doing it for several years, and so far nobody had complications at the pin site, which you do the math is not, you know, it's quite favorable. Nobody had a broken neck as a result of that. And there were two patients who were already scheduled for surgery two weeks later that their rebounds—and we already knew they were very severe—that the rebound was particularly intense and lasted more than a few hours, went into the following day. And so instead of doing the surgery two weeks later, we anticipated to the same hospital stay. So that per se was not a complication, was just you know, right, rebound in somebody who was severe, it would have happened even with the non-invasive traction. But again, this is an elective test that we do. If somebody is worried, not only I'm not gonna strong-arm them to come in or try to convince them, I'm actually happy because you're not that sick after all. If you are, yeah, there is something strange if you are ready to commit for a surgery, but you're emotionally uncomfortable about doing an invasive test which is used for selection, it doesn't make sense. Which brings to the next issue that we had developed over the years. Back in the days before the MRI was used routinely, there was a 5 to 10 years delay between the onset of the symptoms and the corrective surgery. For the severe cases, the EDS, yes, they have the paranoia coming even worse from the, there is nothing wrong with you, the MRI is normal, but their personality is different. These are Type A personality that all of a sudden get frozen, and then once they're corrected, they bounce back and you practically have to put the brake on them. Yeah, we are doing too much. So they're actually patients who are very—there's a lot of satisfaction because you know that you're giving something and they're going to use it. But at the same time, we're having a kind of a different mix of psychiatric disorders. All right, I'm going to go to something uncomfortable now, but first I'm making the point. The endpoint was that at the beginning, we were asking for a psychiatric screen only on the patients that in our early encounters or whatever on the way to the surgery, we either were having some heavy diagnosis on the history like attempted suicide, etc., or they're having heavy-duty drugs, psych drugs on board, or some heavy-duty diagnosis from before. So at that point you say, okay, I send you to—we need a psych clearance. But then I had a few patients who tricked us, a few patients who did not tell us their diagnosis, so they withhold information, or other patients that they acted the part, but then they decompensated at the time of the surgery. And these surgeries are big, so you need the full cooperation. You cannot have somebody sabotaging their own recovery, because then they're going to be exposed to more risk of complication. They're going to have a worse outcome—they're going to squeeze less out of the entire adventure. So we decided that we need to have a psych clearance on everybody, but we had—we fabricated a new parameter. The current parameter is this: you get the clearance from somebody at home, because somebody at home knows you for a long period of time, but they know jack shit about what EDS and the surgery is about. But the guy at home who knows you needs to tell us, okay, is the patient optimized? Is the patient reliable in telling us the symptoms and their intensities? The patient has a support system at home. Is the patient resilient enough, can do all this? And then there is a second independent screening, psych screening with us, with our neuropsychiatrist. Our neuropsych doesn't know these people from before because the encounter is just once, but knows very well two things. Number one, what the neuro-EDS constellation implies in terms of psych evaluation. And number two, what the surgery is about and what's ahead. So he is going to be the guy that pushes back and kind of pokes you inside just to see, okay, you know, I kind of challenge you, but you're really sure? Yeah. You know, like whatever it is, all is, it's not that he's a game. It's just because I say, I say right now it's going to happen, but he's all in, you know, just for the patient to have one last really moment of insight. Because sometimes you're so invested, okay, I'm going to see a neurosurgeon, I'm going to have the surgery, I'm going to be good. But that is just like, okay, that little shaking that somebody needs, you know, like, and we don't do it before the surgery, we do it at the time of the invasive cervical traction. Yes, because if you're coming, let's assume like we did, for example, several years ago, that we were having the psych clearance 2 days prior to the surgery. At that point, it's a kind of a loaded circumstance. The patient's already involved, the insurance is approved, you know, the machinery is going, you know, it's a different kind of psychological pressure. On the other end, when they come for the invasive traction, they don't have a clear-cut, clear-cut, they don't have a confirmed diagnosis yet and don't even know if they're going to be a surgical candidate or not because they don't know what the score is going to be. All right. So what we noticed—yeah, go ahead.

[1:03:07] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: I had another question. I'm sorry. Firstly, your neuropsychiatrist is amazing. A lot of the patients that I have sent, who have seen him actually want to keep him as their psychiatrist. So he's—I can't remember his name right now, but they love him. He's great. He's—and he's, he's very—like you said, he helps them understand exactly what they are going to go through. And a lot of them feel like, yeah, this is the first time they have met somebody who really understands. My question was that we are spread apart. Like, you know, Dr. Bluestein is in Colorado. I am in Rhode Island. And there are other physicians everywhere. And you are in New York City. And you have something called the second opinion report.

[1:04:08] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Yeah.

[1:04:09] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Which I have read many, many times. And I think it is phenomenal. It is a really good report. So can you tell our listeners?

[1:04:22] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Yeah, I'll tell you a secret. Some of the things for the report, how I structure it, actually I copied from you. So that's why I like it so much.

[1:04:35] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Well, so for patients who live in far-off places, as you know, New York is not a cheap—is an expensive city to come to. So the second opinion report really helps them understand what's going on with them and what to expect and what should be the next steps in the diagnosis.

[1:05:00] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Yeah, it is. Can you tell us a bit more about that? Obviously, yeah, it actually is coming from something coming from COVID and legislation. Telemedicine, as you know, is something that is relatively recent, but since more than 90% of our patients since 2001 were from outside the tri-state area, you know, it was kind of problematic to ask the patient, okay, come the first time. And then you do this testing and then you come a second time. And then finally I'm gonna give you a diagnosis. Before you know it, it is at least 2 trips. And 2 trips around the country by somebody who's sick, they need to come for with their companion who has to take time off, gets complicated. So in 2004, we were looking into telemedicine with our health system back then, and there was no legislation. Nationwide. Actually, one state, Texas, was back then, was prohibiting any kind of doctor to call on the phone from outside Texas because they want their patient to be poached. So our health system said, you know, good, you guys want to do telemedicine, guess what? You cannot do it. So it took several years afterwards, and then we were allowed to do telemedicine, you know, to have this. Then COVID came and back then really there was no, the legislation was kind of, there were not so many people doing it, but then COVID came and it started becoming, everybody did it. And with that, the legislation became more precise. So when you see somebody with that, there are specific things and information, you know, things about licensing, et cetera. And so at that point, we had a decision to make. The decision to make was, do we go back to the model before in which the patients come multiple times, or we do something similar? And by that point, they, in some institutions, and Stanford, I guess, was one of the first, they did the second opinion model. Second opinion model means you send, it is something structured, which was already up in the air with other names, but you send in your clinical information, gets reviewed by a committee, then a junior attending or whoever, the poor guy at the bottom of the barrel, has to become the scribe and then sends it back to the patient. And that's it. So we saw some value in that. And the value is this: we, instead of we seeing you in the office and then we tell you this is the workup here to do, whatever, we front load everything. And we say, okay, these are the things you have to do before. Once everything is in, once you fill up our, you know, long, long, long multi-page clinical essay, once you're going to have done with this and you enter the history and blah, blah, then if you see other specialists, good, add their letters too. You know, I know that when I have one of your letters, I can just kick my feet up because you already done everything. I just, the only thing I had to say is the following diagnosis have been suspected by Dr. Chopra and I fully agree. So, that's an easy day. But anyway, like, so at the end of that letter, what we can say is, okay, we have suspicions about this and the clinical historical, provocative testing, radiological, and things we've done so far, because they already give us, you know, we already told them they won't work, raise suspicion, you know, a critical mass of suspicion for the following diagnosis. For which we need additional testing. This is the additional testing. We tell, okay, so you need this, this, and this. And if you want us to confirm it, you come here for invasive testing. So at that point, the first encounter is done with us and we're already, you know, 3, 4 steps ahead with what have been done in the past. In the past, where they've reached that thing like after 6 or 9 months, after 2 or 3 visits with these patients, poor guys going back and forth. So the second opinion for sure, you know, avoids that. But then we figured out another thing was that a lot of patients, since, you know, we didn't make it so expensive, a lot of patients were just curious and not particularly sick. They were writing in. So at that point, we needed somebody to do a screening to separate the patients who were not very severe, not to go to the surgeon, but to go to the other components of our team, were just for the conservative part. You know, because obviously don't throw surgery to everybody, anybody. But at least to prevent the, you know, the people who were sick to have a long line, 50% of which was made by patients who were just mildly sick. So obviously we're still refining the process, but so far it's working pretty well. Yeah, because at the end of all that, when the patient comes in the hospital, all the muscle part, for example, your notes are as long as mine and you know it takes a long, long time to put all the thing. So when they come into the hospital, it is okay, all this is already in the bank, is already worked out. Now we just need to check on these 3, 4 items. And everything else has already been digested, they already read it, whatever. So now we focus on this. So the encounter in the hospital doesn't become a sort of a meandering—I already talk too much myself, but doesn't become like a meandering adventure with a lot of loose ends that then can never be tied up. So everything becomes more effective.

[1:11:20] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So one of the—so now I think we've—what we understand is, and I'm just summarizing it for the readers, listeners, is that the first thing you do is you ask them to fill out some forms, upload their images, radiological images, and then based on that, you come up with a suspicion of the following diagnosis.

[1:11:51] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Yeah.

[1:11:51] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And then, and then if the patient has whatever, Chiari malformation, then actually depends.

[1:12:01] Paolo Bolognese, MD: If the patient has mild symptoms, for example, you can have a monster Chiari 1 malformation on the radiology, but they have mild symptoms and a very good quality of life. At that point, there is no need for them to come here for further invasive testing. Ends up there and say, okay, bye-bye, and in 2 years do another MRI and touch base with me. But on the other hand, you have somebody with craniocervical instability, severe, compromised the quality of life. At that point, the plan is going to be, 'If you're interested to go further, come here, we're going to do the invasive test, and that they, you know, they, uh, we kick it up a couple of notches.' Okay, so once they get that second opinion report, and if you feel that they need to come and see you, um, because they are clinically very symptomatic and their data is just going to be directly for invasive test in a hospital setting. So it's not going to be like, I see you in the office and you're going to come back. You just come here, we do, right? And it's not only the basic traction. For example, some people have suspicion of disorder of the intracranial pressure, going to do an intracranial pressure monitor with positional testing. Or there is a problem with the glossopharyngeal nerve, we're going to do glossopharyngeal block, or there is a suspicion neurogenic bladder, gonna do urodynamics. So the, again, this is, you, since we are more aggressive with our toolkit, the owners of the responsibility of the diagnosis has to go on a stronger and more objective level. So invasive testing is kind of the highest level of standard, diagnostic standard we can apply.

[1:14:06] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So that reminds me about one condition that you treat and you treat it very well called Eagle syndrome. Can you tell our listeners what are the symptoms of Eagle syndrome?

[1:14:23] Paolo Bolognese, MD: All right, there is a bone at the base of the skull which is converging from below the ears, which is converging towards the voice box, and is called the styloid process. And usually a small and thin piece of bone, and it is the attachment for a number of—for about 3 tendons which are attached to muscles which go to the voice box. And, you know, they're helpful with a number of movements that we routinely do. The Eagle Syndrome is when you—this bone becomes very big, very cumbersome, very long, and in doing that creates a number of different things. In the past, it was called Eagle Syndrome only when it was poking the trachea and/or the esophagus.

[1:14:23] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: All right.

[1:15:14] Paolo Bolognese, MD: That was called the—then they found out that sometimes other vessels can, vessels passing by like the jugular or the carotid can be impinged. So that was called the vascular eagle syndrome. Then I was, you know, I was very excited because, oh yeah, these patients, they have a lot of symptoms who come from the glossopharyngeal nerve. So I was ready to publish it. When finally the ENTs figured it out after years that they were debating it. And so they kind of beat me to the punch. But there are a number of cranial nerves passing by that get stretched, pushed, or nudged by these bones simply because they are in the right place. And so this bone, but this bone is bigger, is kind of pushing and shoving. Now, like everything which is related to EDS, they're like the princess and the pea. They're super sensitive for everything. So the majority of the people, they really don't care that they have a styloid which is a little bit bigger or a little bit thicker. Yeah, so the majority—the longest series about eagle, they're actually coming from the Indian continent, because for some kind of reasons over there, the styloids are enormous when they're pathologic.

[1:16:40] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Indian, like?

[1:16:42] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Yep.

[1:16:43] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Really?

[1:16:44] Paolo Bolognese, MD: The largest series that come from there.

[1:16:47] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Oh, the largest.

[1:16:49] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Yeah, the largest. Also because you have 1.3 billion people, but they are really phenomenally big. So there is also a kind of a genetic component to that. Neuro-EDS, they have—is a different thing. The, like I said before, the clinical presentation is mostly affecting mostly function of the glossopharyngeal nerve, the first tract of the styloid. So if it becomes thicker and just passes by, that's a little of extra stretch. In our very touchy-feely EDS people, it's enough to create trouble. And now comes the issue, because the glossopharyngeal nerve is very complex. And if I tell somebody, okay, you know, I go to the doctor and say, okay, I have palpitations and I have a ringing in the ear and I have a sensation of metal taste in my mouth, this guy's going to say you're freaking crazy. And instead, those things come from 3 branches of the same nerve. The glossopharyngeal nerve. So if you remember medical school and neuroanatomy, that's easy. Apparently my ENT colleagues, it took them a while to figure that out. So what you do is this, like, it's the same principle when you go to the dentist and you have a big problem with your tooth and the dentist gives the local, you feel better. So if the glossopharyngeal nerve is crying uncle because it's pushed by the styloid, you just inject some local anesthetic in the neighborhood. And if the symptoms calm down, that means they're linked to the glossopharyngeal, and therefore they're linked to it's because the glossopharyngeal is getting kicked around by this bone. Now comes the tricky part. I remember the association between Chiari and styloid, hypertrophic styloids, and EDS and hypertrophic styloids, we figured out a long time ago. That was not the issue. Since we were not trained as neurosurgeons to do this case, these cases, like we're trained about other things, we're sending these patients, a few in between, to the ENTs. And I remember that one time I sent a patient to an ENT in my health system, and like several hospitals ago, and this patient was 2005. Patient came back in a tracheostomy and a gastrostomy too. Oh yeah, I know. And obviously at that point we became, you know, more prudent about sending because I thought, okay, this is a dangerous surgery. I did not know about, you know, the—like, all right, before I send another one, I'm gonna wait for somebody to be, uh, at least as sick as this one, if not more. So we sent on hundreds of these patients over the years, Chiari and EDS, until one day I said, all right, there was this patient who was really having a big styloid and severe EDS and a craniocervical fusion. Actually, there were two at the same time, and we booked them something like in two consecutive days, and they knew each other, and they were calling themselves like the from Dr. Seuss. They're calling themselves Thing 1 and Thing 2, whatever. And so they were having, they were having craniocervical fusions. So that was raising some problems about the intubation. So I said, all right, I'm going to do it myself. I don't want to send him somewhere else. So I go to the library and I, you know, the days before, and I go through textbooks of head and neck surgery, again, different specialty. And I go through all that, whatever, and take my notes in the operating room that day. And I start, step 1, you put the patient on the table. Step 2, you turn the patient, you turn the—you can't turn anything because the patient was fused. So at that point, I threw the notes away and I realized that the surgery had to be done completely different. So a large patient population of the, with Eagle, they had EDS and former fusions. That creates an enormous technical problem, because it is like you're trying to change the engine in a car, but you open the hood just like this.

[1:21:43] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Right.

[1:21:44] Paolo Bolognese, MD: And not only, but most of the dissection, instead of doing with tools, I do it underneath the mandible blind with my finger, and then I dislocate the thing and they can go on. So practically we had to adapt the surgery to the circumstances with maneuvers that were not in the book. And other thing that I realized afterwards is by that point I already had a number of years of experience with EDS patients, so I knew that they were not tolerating a lot of dissection nonsense. So I realized what happened to that ENT in the past. The ENT did the surgery like the ENTs do using the Bovie knife, which is the electrocautery.

[1:22:30] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Right.

[1:22:31] Paolo Bolognese, MD: The fire stick, we call it in jargon. And you cannot do that around nerves in general, but nerves in EDS, that's the case with that. So at that point, once I pass the skin, I don't use any cautery at all. So it's all blunt dissection and nothing else.

[1:22:50] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Makes sense.

[1:22:51] Paolo Bolognese, MD: So, you know, so it was, so far it has worked, whatever. But that doesn't mean that it's never going to be complications, never going to happen. But that's an example about how to adapt the technique to a specific subset of patients that are kind of strange and different. About the diagnostics is, okay, you know, we know the problem now. It's obvious when everything is normal, it's obvious when everything is like textbook enormous. And the finesse is where do you—where in the shades of gray you draw the line. So right now the thing is we do a 3D CT angiogram because it shows us the structure, the length and thickness of the styloid, and is to be a CT angiogram, because then we see how they, especially the jugular passes by and the carotid passes by, and how they're affected in 3D. And then we do a glossopharyngeal test. But again, before we get to that level, there is clinical. We have a series of all the symptoms which are linked to the glossopharyngeal nerve, check, check, check. Then there is the provocative test. You push here and the patient sucks.

[1:24:15] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Oh my goodness.

[1:24:16] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Or you put inside the mouth and they jump. That means that that nerve is hurting the same way that you would do this to a tooth with decay. The third one is the doctor, you know, the history. So, you know, the patient had, um, progressively those symptoms got worse and blah blah. Very often happens after a tooth extraction or other things. So there are certain kind of patterns we keep seeing. Then there is the fourth, which is the radiological part. The three D CT is self-explanatory. And then the fifth, which is the glossopharyngeal block for the provocative test, invasive. And if symptoms improve, at that point we can link him for sure to the glossopharyngeal nerve, and we can go ahead in chopping up that thing. Now, we do one at a time. And separated by 2 months. So in case there is a problem or a complication, you're not going to have somebody with tracheostomy in the PEG again like it happened to that colleague of mine.

[1:25:36] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Right. So my—so we talked about craniocervical instability, we talked about Eagle syndrome. Um, we also want to talk to your other expertise is in Chiari malformation.

[1:25:50] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Yeah.

[1:25:51] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And, you know, you mentioned cranial settling. And to my understanding is that cranial settling is a very big issue in this population. Now, in my understanding, so in terms of cranial settling, I'm sorry, how would you want your patients, what kind of imaging do you want in patients for Chiari malformation to show, like, can we do a supine MRI? Can—do we need an upright MRI?

[1:26:25] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Okay, first of all, a cranial settling is an old-timey term for what, in a simpler way, is the vertical dimension of craniocervical instability. So you can have a rotational component. You can have an anterior-posterior component, like for example C1-C2 instability pure. The rotational component would be the bowhunter syndrome, in which people do like this and the vertebra gets choked. And then there is the vertical. Going back to the morphometrics, basion-dens interval—the normal dimension, the normal distance between the base of the skull and the top of C2 should be between 4 and 5 millimeters in point. And when you go sitting, you should just settle by a millimeter, millimeter and a half tops. If you extract the head like this, should go up 1.5 millimeters tops, right? So that is the normal range. Now, people with EDS, if they are hypermobile, they can have much more than that without symptoms. That's in hypermobility. But if they become sick because of it, that point becomes instability. Hypermobility plus symptoms equal instability. So you have the sense that something is wrong when in the supine position on a high-definition MRI the BDI is 2 or 3 millimeters. That's already an indication that maybe that patient has cranial settling, vertical instability. The second thing is that when we do the traction, we pull up, if you have a movement, a difference between off traction and on traction of 2 millimeters or more, that's vertical instability, cranial settling. That's actually one of the surgical qualification criteria. And so cranial settling can happen in many different things. Traditionally in neurosurgery is described in pathologies which destroy the joint, like inflammatory things like rheumatoid arthritis, or tumors in the area, or traumas which, you know, vertical traumas which break down the condyles. So that's a cranial settling classic craniocervical instability. But our patient the viscosity of the joint is totally altered. So the—it is like, um, you have a cylinder inside, um, you have a piston inside the cylinder, you know, they go up and down, but there is oil and they do not go from one to the other. All of a sudden you're seeing the falls down. Okay. And then if you may—if you had the explosion, poof, it goes up, it goes out to the wood. Out of the hood of the car and he jumps in the street. That is abnormal. Okay, it collapses too much and expands too much. So that is craniocervical instability in car terms. Um, now different doctors have their own things. Uh, generally what I start with is the MRI in supine of 3 Tesla at least, but 3 Tesla is fine, uh, 1.5 is acceptable, but 3 nowadays is very easy to be found anywhere. Supine position, nothing else, because we have the best definition of the joint. Once you start going for an upright MRI, upright MRIs by definition have a very small magnet, which is 0.5. The upper—I know, actually know very well the guy who invented the upright MRI was one of the very first inventors of the MRI principle. And actually lives nearby here. And he was together with us in our old university. But the story is, although it's a very good and helpful thing, you don't have a good picture, and all of a sudden all those morphometric measurements, the execution of which rely on crisp definition of bone versus ligament, right, gets blurred out. Number one. Number two is if you send somebody and do the flexion and extension, it is not standardized, because if that day there is Mr. Smith the technician who is nervous about doing it is going to say, okay, move a little bit, move a little bit, I'm nervous because you're sick. Other times, if you can have a flexion, there are two different kinds of flexion. If you have a flexion like this, the stress of the flexion is in the lower part of the cervical spine. Okay. If I do like this, the stress is on the higher part of the cervical spine all the way to the junction. So you can have two people doing a major effort, but stressing two different parts of the spine simply because the technician is used to that. The majority of technicians who do MRI flex-extension are to test degenerative joint disease in the mid-lower cervical spine. So, you know, already something strange. But the thing which is, uh, the most absurd, but then you think about it, it makes sense, is if you have somebody who's hypermobile from EDS but zero symptoms, they're going to give you these scary contortionist levels of flexion and extension, especially in extension. They are absurd, but they can do it because they have zero symptoms. On the other end, the patient on the opposite side of the spectrum who's super sick, he would rather get shot than move even just a little bit. So all of a sudden, what is this upright flex-extension MRI, even if we get standardized, gets you? I know. Becomes helpful from, so if it's a screening, is not that great. It has all these pitfalls, but for specific things can be helpful. For example, you have, you want to test if there is a gliding, an excessive gliding between C2 and C3 and C1 and C2. Fine. At that point, you have a specific thing and you use that as a, like as a sniper rifle, but not as a screening tool, you know, also realistically. The MRI is not going to authorize 500 tests, especially 500 MRIs. So if they authorize one MRI of the cervical spine, and then these patients very often need an MRI of the lumbar, and sometimes they have problems inside their head, you know, before you know it, they have MRI lumbar and cervical for sure. You also add the MRI flex-extension in an MRI upright, they're going to tell pick one. And if you pick up an MRI upright, at that point you're going to have a crappy MRI of the cervical spine of the area that you really want to see, with data that are not really going to be standardized. So that's why I start with the MRI cervical supine high definition, because I can always order the other one later in small amounts for a specific subset of problems. But if you use it as a screening, you shoot yourself in foot. Because then if you really need a good picture, you have to wait until the insurance tells you yes.

[1:34:20] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So for patients with Chiari malformation, what kind of imaging do you want to see?

[1:34:25] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Yeah, that's okay. In the past, people were saying, okay, I'm going to get an MRI of the brain because the disease of the brain. That's actually, if you have one shot and one MRI, that's not the best MRI to do. Yes, best MRI to do is an MRI supine, high definition, of the cervical spine. Because MRI of the cervical spine, classically done, shows you the entire posterior fossa and the entire cervical spine. And about 50% of the Chiari 1 malformations have an associated syringomyelia cavity. So that single test puts you ahead of the game. Already. So, so that is, that's a good way to start. Then obviously you want, once you have that screening, you pass it to a neurosurgeon and they're going to do other things, etc. Like in the past, I remember when first came out in the late '90s, there was cine MRI, first came out, we were excited. Oh, fine, we're going to see the cerebrospinal fluid flow. Fast forward 10 years and all the experts—while the other people were speaking it up—all the experts dropped it because they were saying the cine MRI, the vast majority of the times, doesn't tell me something I do not know already. If I have a patient with this visible herniation and the patient is sick like a dog and the symptoms are coming from there, guess what? 90+ times I'm going to do the cine MRI, it's going to show me that there is some blockage posteriorly. Big, big damn surprise. I already knew before, right? On the other hand, the cine MRI can be helpful if you have an herniation that is not particularly, you know, vertically is not that deep. There is discrepancy between the symptoms which are Chiari-like and very strong and the appearance of the MRI that looks a little bit not vanilla but less than what you would expect. At that point, you use the cine MRI as a tiebreaker.

[1:36:30] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So, so on a—so my—so from what I understand is that you're looking for a high-definition 3 Tesla supine MRI of the neck.

[1:36:44] Paolo Bolognese, MD: 1.5 is acceptable. Yeah, in cases of Chiari malformation, which is the same image that I need for to investigate craniocervical instability.

[1:36:55] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Right.

[1:36:55] Paolo Bolognese, MD: So everything wrong from here to here, MRI cervical supine 3.0.

[1:37:02] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Now, a lot of these patients with Chiari malformation also present with intracranial hypertension.

[1:37:10] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Yeah, that's a good—that's a classic thing of the chicken and the egg. First of all, we have to talk about semantics, and there are a lot of actually people in the field that they're very loose with the semantics, and they create confusion for themselves and for the patients. So the thing out there is that many, many people, and wrongly so, they see the cerebellar tonsils coming out of this, coming down and out of the skull where they belong inside the skull, and they say that's a Chiari malformation. That's bullshit, okay? The herniation of the tonsil is just the anatomical effect of 18 different mechanisms, which can be summarized in 4. I can push the tonsils out of the skull. I can squeeze the tonsils out of the skull. I can pull them down from below, or they can dangle like the cheeks of a bulldog. Okay, so the classic Chiari 1 malformation is the purest, is the Chiari—the tonsillar herniation caused by a volumetrically small posterior fossa. It's like squeezing a zit. The posterior fossa is a craniosynostosis of the posterior fossa, the Chiari 1 malformation, and the herniation of the tonsils is its effect. So it's disorder of the skull which is squeezing out the brain, right? So squeeze is Chiari. There is also another, you know, you can have syndromic Chiari, you can have other forms of craniosynostosis, you can have a pinhead opposite, you know, Chiari is going to come down. Then you can push. If you have a tumor in the posterior fossa, it's going to push all the way along, including the tonsils, for the path of least resistance outside of the hole, which is the bottom of the skull. Big hole in Latin means foramen magnum. So you push them down simply because the posterior fossa, the skull over here, is normal in size, but there is a big fat guy who's pushing you around, right? So we have the squeeze and we have the push. We have something pulling down. Like if you have severe forms of tethered cord, like you can have a Chiari malformation, etc., or also tight falx terminalis, very tight, can displace the tonsils downwards in different degrees. So Chiari malformation, lipomyelomeningocele, can actually pull the spinal cord down to the pelvis, to the sacrum, at a very young age, and then the brain—a lot, not only the tonsils, but a part of the cerebellum leave the skull and go into the spine. And other times, people with tight falx terminale, they can actually have a minimal displacement. Now comes the confusion. There are a lot of, some of my colleagues, to make things even more complicated, call Chiari 0, Chiari 0.5, Chiari 0.75. For God's sake. Then there are the 5mm rule, which was decided by neuroradiologists who never seen patients, who didn't know if the patient has symptoms or not. He decided the Chiari malformation was just with the tonsils were 5mm or more, but if 4.75 was no Chiari, what kind of bullshit is that? So whatever. So practically you can pull them down because if you pull down the spinal cord, then the brainstem, the brainstem is attached with 3 prongs. So the cerebellum is attached to 3 prongs to the brainstem, and again, it comes down. The first piece of the cerebellum coming down are the tonsils. So we have push, squeeze, and pull. And there is the dangle, you know, people with EDS, saggy things, saggy here, saggy there, the uterine prolapse, you know. So it's not a surprise that something can also sag. Now, the gravity of the nervous system is not gravity for all the rest because the nervous system is bathing in cerebrospinal fluid. So there is this kind of thing which is buoyant, but is more like the boat which is more to the dock. So you're not a boat in the middle of the ocean, you're more to the dock and you'll be like there and somebody would see it, would with EDS, you're expecting some degree of sagging. The typical tonsil should be 3 millimeters above the foramen magnum. But, you know, you have one nose, I have a bigger nose, she has a different cuter nose, you know, like, so comes for the tonsils. So there is a—it's not that everybody is 3 millimeters. If you are—some people, they are above, somebody below. So there is a spectrum, and unfortunately, this spectrum of normal overlaps slightly with the spectrum of abnormal. So, you know, but if we, without going for another half an hour on this thing, that's why there are the experts out there. But unfortunately, a lot of the confusion comes from the fact that when you start calling Chiari everything, regardless of the cause, you're creating confusion. So Chiari actually started being described by this guy who was a pathologist and was actually geographically was Italian, but at the time he was living in the Austrian-Hungarian Empire and he was the pathologist in Prague. And, you know, back then, what was the major pathology for the, you know, for the end of the 19th century? TB. Tuberculosis. So he was doing autopsies on people with TB. These people were having hydrocephalus secondary to TB infection. And that was a, the first herniation you saw was actually the push level, the squeezing, because the hydro was pushing things down. Then he started seeing afterwards and, but he was doing a, it was a pathology-based and anatomically-based description. Then afterwards became an MRI-based description, but the best ground to stand is a pathophysiology, mechanism-based, because if you understand the mechanism, understanding what you have to do to fix it is easy. So if somebody has a Chiari malformation because it's a deviation from the squeeze, you have to do a Chiari surgery. But if it is coming from a push, at that point you're barking up the wrong tree. Which brings me to the, uh, one of the questions that I didn't answer before, which was the intracranial hypertension. That's a chicken and the egg situation. In some cases, you can have the squeeze level, herniation going down. That's typical Chiari with mild elevated or by the elevation of the pressure, which normalizes after the decompression. Bingo. And on the opposite end, you can have a patient with pseudotumor cerebri in which the pressure inside the head is very high uniformly. The skull in the back is normal in shape, and that's a push situation. So the pseudotumor is causing tonsil herniation. Fine, there are some anatomical details which are different, but that's the principle. And then there are situations in which you have both. You have the Chiari, you do the decompression, the patient still has high pressure if you do an intracranial pressure monitoring. So in this way, the patient has 1 plus 1 equals 3 situation. So in order to—again, pathophysiology—you need to treat both for the patient to have a full recovery. So in the past, what was called pseudotumor, because it was—they didn't have CAT scans, and the people were opening the skull of people looking for a tumor, and there was none. And then it was thought that it was a cerebrospinal fluid disorder because you're doing the lumbar puncture and CSF was spraying out of the needle. Then it was understood afterwards that the problem was not the CSF, the problem was not nothing else, it was tumor. The problem was a swollen brain, but the swollen brain from what? Fast forward several years, it was swollen brain because the venous circulation was choked up, which is easy because I choke myself like this, my face is going to become purple, it bleeds into the brain. Which has a lot more of dealing with a lot more blood flow. And there are only two ways out, which are the two jugular veins. So fast forward to last year, and to actually to a few years ago, and pretty much at the same time, Dr. Higgins from Cambridge and myself and another guy, we kind of stumbled on a number of patients. I was coming from a different direction, looking at styloids, and next to the styloid, there was the tubercle of C1. And I was very often, I was seeing the jugular sandwiched between the two. So I was looking, I was removing the styloid, and then sometimes I was seeing the jugular re-expanding and the pressure normalized. I said, wow, that's great. On the other hand, Higgins at Cambridge was looking in a different direction. He was looking at C1. And he was seeing this C1 like a starfish around the rock, doing like this around the peduncle and the tubercle. So long story short, coming from different direction, we hit the same thing with the compression of the jugular, either in the sandwich or unilaterally at the level of C1. And then we started noticing other things. People with EDS, especially EDS with cranial settling. Imagine that you have a burger, okay, and you push it like this. What does the burger do? So patients with EDS, very often their ring C1 in chronic settling becomes wider, and in becoming wider, the peduncle, which are like—imagine that I am like this and I keep my elbows—my elbows are going to go more out and they're going to go towards the jugular. By doing that creates a, it is the equivalent of me putting my foot over garden hose and creates a venous congestion inside the brain and the pressure goes up. So last year I started, you know, shaving since I'm there for other reasons, like I'm there for Chiari or there for fusions. I just go a little bit more lateral and I can reach those bones and I cut them all of a sudden. Patients that were problem patients for a while for me, and I put the shunt today, then I put another shunt 3 months later, keeps failing. All of a sudden the pressure normalizes and I felt stupid. There was one patient, one of the, you know, again, one of those sheep who got lost. There was this patient who was suicidal. When we first met her in 2001, because she was having extremely loud tinnitus. Actually, she had two tinnitus at the same time. One was high pitch, one was a sort of a machinery low pitch. Constant. She couldn't sleep. It was like living in a factory constantly. And she was, you know, she was ready to put an end to their life. And she came, we did a lumbar puncture, pressure was very high. The symptoms improved to the point it was tolerable. So we put the shunt. And pseudotumor, the ventricles are very small, so the failure rate is very high. So we were doing something like one shunt every year. She was, and then we tried different shunt configuration, different shunt valves. Technology got better, but the headache was better, the ringing was better, but was never zero. And then, you know, after she was one of the first patients that I chopped those tubercles in the ring for the first time in her entire life, was gone. Wow. It took me 22 years. So, no, you kind of feel stupid afterwards. So you say like, it was there, like, why I didn't know this before? But again, you do not know what you do not know.

[1:50:14] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Exactly, and you thought about it. So that brings me to one more question, and I don't know, Dr. Bluestein, do we still have time?

[1:50:23] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So why don't you ask your question, then I have a question, and then we'll wrap up.

[1:50:27] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Okay, we have a subset of patients with EDS that start to have dizziness when they turn their head to one side. What is that?

[1:50:42] Paolo Bolognese, MD: All right. And that's another good thing because there were some things I did not know either. One of the—one is easy to find and one is called the bowhunter syndrome. Bowhunter because you are a hunter, use the bow. And the two vertebral arteries pass inside C1, and they're passing inside a hole. And then they also pass inside a hole at the level of C2. The bowhunter syndrome, because of the hypermobility or, and, or the configuration of C2, because all depends how much redundant, you know, if C2 in between the two holes has a lot of slack and you rotate a lot, the slack can tolerate for a while. But if you don't have a lot of slack and you overturn, at that point you're going to create a kink in the tubing. Let me just show you something like this. Is like, like this, you rotate and all of a sudden rotating gets like this. Or imagine that is super tense the moment it gets super tense at the level of the two holes, create a kink, create a stenosis, and that causes hypoperfusion from the vertebral artery. What's the correction? The only thing you have to do is just to tell, you know, doctor, it hurts when I do this, don't do it anymore. So you just fuse C1 and C2 so the relative architecture of the two preserves the integrity of the vertebra. So that is one. Then there are some other patients that, remember the styloid, etc., that in their three-dimensional arrangement can actually kink the jugular. Most of the times the styloids, when they're hypertrophic, bilateral, they can actually choke the jugulars. At that point, choking the jugulars create an intermittent pseudotumor. Okay, then there are some other patients that when they turn, they can have a more complex structure in which some different cranial nerves are involved. And at that point, you can have the 10th or the 10th and 9th, they're functionally connected. So you can use one as a kind of a backdoor for the other, but that's a different story. But you can have not the artery, not the vein, but the cranial nerves being affected. But at the end is this stupid thing. It is something mechanic that is affecting something else.

[1:53:36] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And that leads me to my question, which was, hopefully people by now are realizing that there's a lot that happens in the neck, the base of the brain. And so these workups are very, very complex. And I think in the beginning when you were explaining about patient selection and invasive cervical traction and how important that is, I think most people don't realize that you don't want to have a surgery that you don't need. Like, I think some people think, oh, that seems like an easy fix, or if that's the definitive fix for CCI, for example, don't I want that? Don't I want that definitive fix? But as you're describing all of these other things that can look kind of similar, a lot of people I imagine are thinking, oh my gosh, I don't think anyone's ever worked me up for, you know, Eagle syndrome or Bowhunter, you know, any of these other things. Do you have any suggestions for people who, again, as Dr. Chopra pointed out, people that are listening to this are literally all over the world, actually. And they might be listening and saying, gosh, I wish I could schedule an appointment with Dr. Bolognese or to get a screening of some sort with some of his team. But for people that can't even do that, do you have any suggestions for how they can try to get an appropriate workup? You were describing multiple different ways that people can have something that looks like Chiari but actually only one of them actually is Chiari, right? So those details are so important.

[1:55:02] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Yeah, the key is to find somebody locally like you, you know, like the quote unquote, you know, EDS specialist or concierge EDS specialist or aficionado or the EDS bodega, whatever you want to call it. Uh, it doesn't matter because it doesn't really matter if you're a neurosurgeon, a pain specialist, or a pediatric cardiologist or whatever. There are so many of ours that, uh, or physiatrists, et cetera. It doesn't really matter because then at the end we kind of have a major overlap of diagnosis, et cetera. So the important thing is to find somebody local. So in the United States, it's absolutely not a problem because if it is true that 20 years ago there were not so much, right now there is not only a raised awareness, but a lot of people going into the field. And that's very good. The risk for some of my neurosurgical colleagues, if there is a neurosurgeon looking and whatever, I would tell them, think twice about getting into EDS because it's not that easy. And if you get into it, go slow in the beginning for a while before going. Don't make the mistake of pushing the pedal from the beginning, otherwise you're going to, you know, at least, um, at least in the beginning we didn't have anybody to ask, but at least ask somebody who has more experience before you commit with the large volume of patients, because then otherwise you're gonna have the eggs on the face and then, uh, you're gonna just leave and quit. So it's a better strategy for a neurosurgeon with more, uh, more things at stake and forms of treatment which are more impactful to go slow, to have a long period of lessons. The real problem is in the other countries, but the good news is that in the other countries, things are changing. Uh, the United Kingdom has decided in March of this year to create 3 multidisciplinary centers for neuro-EDS. That was one of the bastions of skepticism worldwide. Uh, Australia has one, Italy has a couple of centers of neuro-EDS diagnostic, and they're starting exploring into that. Um, Spain has a couple of specialists who are dealing with that. Holland, they started and they stopped, and probably they're going to restart again. So you cannot put everybody, you know, you cannot expect that somebody who's just starting is going to have the same kind of results as somebody who's been 10 or 20 years in the field or whatever. But we are not anymore the way we were 20 years ago. So I'm very, very optimistic. But finding somebody with a good reputation is very, very important. And I would always start—right now there is the advantage of people like you guys around. I will always start from a primary care neuro-EDS physician before committing in, because, you know, people like you guys are going to be like the quarterback. Like, neuro-EDS is going to need, you know, at a certain point is going to need a SMASH procedure, is going to need a kidney transposition because of a May-Thurner, or is going to need, you know, other, you know, an orthopedic repair done at Harvard by my friend who does ligament reconstruction, or they need a TMJ procedure done in Indiana. So people like you know who the players are, where to send them, and they are the quarterback. We are just, they're the, you know, what's his name? The quarterback, you know, we, I'm just a wide receiver, you know, one of the many.

[1:59:16] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. Very good. And I always like to end with hypermobility hacks. This is something that started with Dr. Chopra. He was coming up with all of these different hacks, and I thought, that's really great. So do you have any hypermobility hacks to share with our listeners?

[1:59:40] Paolo Bolognese, MD: The going to fundamental is—okay, the first act is, it's a negative one, not a positive one.

[1:59:50] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's okay.

[1:59:51] Paolo Bolognese, MD: And it is actually a warning. I understand the enthusiasm, and actually I'm probably partially responsible because in the past we did a lot of educational videos and, you know, to make the patients more educated. But sometimes things get out of hand. So I see a lot of people, a lot of patients, do you know, playing morphometrics with each other, playing doctor on each other, or rendering opinion on the grounds of this and that. This is kind of—I'm not saying that, you know, I'm super smart and whatever, nobody else will deal with that. No, that would be stupid, especially because if I look back things that I, things I did not know 10 years ago, I'm smiling at now. But it's very dangerous to play. If it is very dangerous to play doctor for any kind of pathology, this is a kind of a field that is very complicated. So even it's difficult for us to do a nuanced diagnosis and a certain degree. For sure, the patients are not, even if they know more about neuro-EDS than the average primary care physician they find at home. Indeed, out of all the time that they have, well, EDS from its standard training is a footnote of one page of the internal medicine manual. But that said, they should not do it because they're just giving each other a disservice. Second thing is which way is a major no-no. Right now we are finally coming off the peak of being able to convince a larger doctor community that these patients are legit and this subdiscipline is legit. So if we have a bunch of patients playing loose, they're gonna give the entire cause a bad name. To either critics who are critics in good faith or critics who are just looking for some, you know, easy target to shoot and say, you see, I told you this is a bunch of bullshit. So this is my negative thing. About the positive hack, I would recommend, you know, is the principle of kicking the tire. If you have a suspicion about something, just kick the tire. So if you think that you have an instability, put yourself in traction, put yourself in a car, even if the two things are not equivalent. And the important thing is not to do it once because you could have something like there is the placebo effect. Placebo effect, you do it and you really want to do something and to see this. It is like marrying somebody and you're infatuated. Guess what? After 20 years, if that person is really not right, the placebo effect goes away. After 20 years, it's no longer there. So before jumping to conclusion after one test or non-invasive test self-administered, just check if the results are consistent. And then at that point, get the yellow flag up and look for—otherwise, you know, right now, yes, there are people dealing with neuro-EDS like us, but we're not that many. So we don't, it is against the public interest to flood the resources which are around with things that if just the patient had tested 2, 3 more times, at least, you know, they found that maybe it was not that hot, that result. So provocative testing and repetition, they are a lot of the thing. The mark of shame. Oh, that guy's just neurotic because look at this, the history is long like this. How can it be? Even if he's legit, even if he's a specialist, he would appreciate the nuances. Another negative hack is do not use the term migraine. Migraine is a specific diagnosis. Yes. Which means that you just have visual flushing followed by headache, just with head pain just in one side of the head. And you had to go in a dark room for 3 days and respond just to a specific set of medications. That's it. That's migraine. Don't call migraine everything else. Otherwise, number one, you create confusion on a doctor because the doctor who just is writing, you know, my primary care physician has 5 minutes to see you. He's just gonna write in your medical report that you have migraine while that is not the diagnosis. Telling you have a headache and where the headache is and how many times it happens, what makes it worse and what makes it better. Those are probably the two most important things.

[2:05:00] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yes.

[2:05:01] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Because that gives the diagnosis away before you even see the MRI. Like one of the exercises I do with my team is we read the questionnaire, the history, and the provocative test without seeing any MRI or any former diagnosis on the specialist and on the ground. So 3 things only, which is old school medicine, 19th century, we call the diagnosis.

[2:05:31] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: That is good.

[2:05:31] Paolo Bolognese, MD: And, you know, like, so, so no more damn migraine diagnosis, otherwise they're just going to confuse people.

[2:05:39] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right. Yes.

[2:05:41] Paolo Bolognese, MD: And then also to have a healthy sense of skepticism about it, not to fall in love with things, but to keep a balance. You're saying okay, doubt yourself before you just go 0 to 100.

[2:05:55] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Okay.

[2:05:55] Paolo Bolognese, MD: But because if it is true, it's going to be true anyway at the end. Just, just repeat the test, repeat the test, repeat the test, and no, don't jump to conclusion after 1. If after 10, repeat the following day another attempt. If it is all, if it is the right thing, guess what? 19 out of 20 are going to be positive.

[2:06:18] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So as we try to wind up, I have a tiny little hack. I'm sorry, I'm addicted to hacks. So this is a very small hack. A lot of times patients with craniocervical instability have difficulty sleeping because when they sleep and they turn sides, then it wakes them up. And so they can't sleep. What I recommend is using one of the inflatable airline pillows that you put around your neck and you can sleep with that on. And so that prevents your head from rolling when you go to sleep.

[2:07:02] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Good. So I'm going to add one, which is a positive hack since I've been so negativistic so far. People with headache, high-pressure headache, which gets worse when you cough, sneeze, or strain.

[2:07:17] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yes.

[2:07:17] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Very often they sleep on 3 or 4 pillows, which is good in the beginning of the night. And then they wake up and they're like this because the pile of pillows falls down. So the best thing to do is not to use pillows, but to use a wedge underneath. Now, not so many people can afford the bed doing like this, but just to get the big wedge, which can be like a, you know, can be just wood underneath the mattress, or it can be a bunch of softer material. Cut you a wedge, put you underneath the head of the mattress, and that's gonna give you a good thing, which is gonna be more effective than a bunch of pillows then.

[2:07:55] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: All right. So you get the award for the hack of the day. And with this, we are so appreciative that this has been one of the best podcasts I've ever seen, and it was so valuable. And we thank you. I know you had a long day in the operating room today, and it is late for all of us, Dr. Bolognese, and I can't tell you how appreciative we all are. And I'm sure our listeners are going to be very, very—because I always say knowledge is power. And in this field where there are so few physicians who understand this, this information is gold. So thank you for coming. Thank you very much for coming on the Bendy Bodies podcast and sharing your knowledge with us. We—

[2:08:57] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Thank you for having me.

[2:08:57] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Very appreciative of that.

[2:09:00] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, yes, we are so grateful. This is such an important conversation and one that I think so many people are going to benefit from. So we really appreciate it.

[2:09:10] Paolo Bolognese, MD: You're going to add subtitles, obviously.

[2:09:12] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And, and thank you so much to Dr. Chopra for being the most amazing guest co-host. So really appreciate it.

[2:09:20] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Oh, thank you.

[2:09:22] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Dr. Chopra, when I met him, I couldn't believe it because it was years I was trying to explain to my fellow neurosurgeons about all this. And all of a sudden I met him and he had understood it by that time, which was several years ago, better than all the guys that I was preaching to for years and years. And I, like, after a little while he was better than them. And I was like, How is it possible? Like, he's not a neurosurgeon because obviously I was very like elitist, et cetera. How? And then I realized that he was just unique.

[2:09:57] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Wow. That's incredible. Because a lot of people probably don't realize that the neurosurgical, typical neurosurgical residency in the United States is 7 years, right? And that's after 4 years of medical school and college, 4 years of medical school, and then a 7-year residency. Is that—is that—

[2:10:13] Paolo Bolognese, MD: I did it twice, so I finished at 41. Yeah.

[2:09:57] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Wow.

[2:10:18] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Age 41, I finished. So like, um, somebody says they did it twice because I was not that smart.

[2:10:24] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Goodness. Oh my goodness. Uh, well, well, thank you so much to both of you. I'm so incredibly grateful that we got to have this conversation, and I know so many people will appreciate it. And yes, um, I will also put this in the show notes, but definitely I will encourage people to watch this on YouTube where they can see the subtitles. We will be having the transcript also available so they can read along and be able to find, search for the specific things they want, and they can look at that specific timeline and everything.

[2:10:52] Paolo Bolognese, MD: So since we're talking about a questionnaire, etc., and since my questionnaire is an open source, I'm going to send you the form that we use, not only for the patients to see, but also very important for any practitioner who wants to use it or copy paste or copy paste modify. This is like for everybody to benefit from what we have learned over 20+ years. So it is, so they, it's kind of, they start from what, where we ended.

[2:11:28] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That is incredibly generous. Thank you so much. That is really, really generous. And we will link that so people can access it. And that's amazing. That is amazing. So you're sharing your knowledge and resources, which is phenomenal. So thank you so much. And we'll see you next time on the Bendy Bodies Podcast.

[2:10:24] Paolo Bolognese, MD: Thank you.

[2:11:49] Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Bye-bye.

[2:11:53] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Thank you for listening to this week's episode of the Bendy Bodies Podcast with the Hypermobility MD. Visit our new website at bendybodiespodcast.com where you can now view guest profiles and show notes with links to products and journal articles. Leave me a comment, sign up for updates, leave a review or a voicemail, and access the podcast on your favorite player all directly from our website. You may hear your voicemail in a future episode where we answer your question or dive into your gracious feedback. Follow us on Instagram at bendy_bodies. We love seeing your posts and stories, so be a buddy and engage our community by using the hashtag #BendyBuddy. That's hashtag B-E-N-D-Y-B-U-D-D-Y. You can also find me, Dr. Linda Bluestein, on Instagram, Facebook, Twitter, or LinkedIn at @HypermobilityMD. Visit hypermobilitymd.com for information about medical services and one-on-one coaching. This podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine or other professional healthcare services, including the giving of medical advice. No doctor-patient relationship is formed. Do not disregard or delay obtaining medical advice for any medical condition you have. Opinions shared are that of the guest and do not necessarily represent the views of the host or any particular organization. Sponsorship of the podcast does not necessarily mean an endorsement. Thank you for being a part of our community, and we'll catch you next time on The Bendy Bodies Podcast.
