---
num: 81
title: >-
  81. Foot Pain 101: Everything You Need to Know with EDS and HSD with Lisa
  Ralston, PT
date: '2023-12-07'
duration: 1h 15m
description: "In this episode, YOUR guest is Lisa Ralston, a physical therapist with over 30 years of experience in orthopedics, joint hypermobility, foot pain, and sports medicine. Since 2009, she has traveled internationally treating Team USA Olympians and World level figure skaters. Lisa was the physical therapist for Team USA figure skating for the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing.\_ Lisa is the owner and founder of Ralston Physical Therapy and Wellness in Arvada, CO.\_\n\nYOUR host, as always, is Dr. Linda Bluestein, the Hypermobility MD."
tags:
  - EDS
  - Exercise
  - Treatment
  - Hypermobility
audioUrl: >-
  https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH7017651498.mp3?updated=1721670394
videoUrl: 'https://youtu.be/PKMcEUGcDWY'
snippets: []
guests:
  - 'Lisa Ralston, PT'
guestImages: []
---
[00:24] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Welcome back, every bendy body. This is the Bendy Bodies Podcast, and I'm your host and founder, Dr. Linda Bluestein, the Hypermobility MD. This is going to be a great episode, so be sure to stick around until the very end so you don't miss any of our special hypermobility hacks. As always, this information is for educational purposes only and is not a substitute for personalized medical advice. I am so excited to have Lisa Ralston with me. Lisa is a physical therapist with over 30 years of experience in orthopedics, bendy bodies, and sports medicine. She graduated from Cal State Long Beach in 1990 and previously owned All Sports Physical Therapy in Parker for 16 years. While Ralston specializes in treating hips, feet, athletes, and complicated connective tissue disorders. She believes in taking care of the whole person. Since 2009, she has traveled internationally treating Team USA Olympians and world-level figure skaters. Lisa was the physical therapist for Team USA figure skating for the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing. Lisa is the owner and founder of Ralston Physical Therapy and Wellness in Arvada, Colorado, and she is also licensed in California and offers virtual services. Lisa, hello and thank you so much for coming on to Bendy Bodies.

[02:00] Lisa Ralston, PT: Hi, Dr. Linda. So excited to be here.

[02:03] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wonderful, wonderful. And I want to acknowledge, if anyone's watching this on video, we are sitting in the Colorado sunshine and I have the sun shining in my face. So it's good for setting the circadian rhythm, not so good for recording video, but we'll get through it. So it's so great to chat with you. I have to admit that I personally have an interest in foot problems and orthotics and am super eager to dig into this topic with you. And so that's what we're going to talk about today, foot pain, orthotics, and, you know, really just kind of dig into your expertise. So, can you start out by telling us why so many people with joint hypermobility have foot pain?

[02:49] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yes, absolutely. First, I want to also admit this is my first podcast, so, and it was actually some of my patients that encouraged me to talk about this because I do want to share. I have so many patients that come who have seen providers and nobody even put their hands on their feet and just handed orthotics, and there's so much we can do. But basically, because it's so hard for bendy bodies to hold their posture, and it takes so much effort. And so that's one of the reasons that the hypermobile body—and hypermobile can have stiff areas, which we're going to talk about that affect function—but basically it just takes so much effort to hold the posture. And so that really affects the load on our feet and our function. And so we have a lot of compensations and increased load on certain joints and tissues because our bodies are working so hard to hold a basic posture and alignment, which is key.

[03:55] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That makes sense. And I don't know that a lot of us think about posture as it relates to our feet.

[04:01] Lisa Ralston, PT: Right. It's our foundation. And I think that also, our patients and us, you know, there's so many providers and there's so many important things, right, for that we're dealing with GI issues and, you know, POTS and dysautonomia and headaches and cervical instability that the feet are sort of like, oh, we'll get there. And so I think some of it is, it's just sort of a thing we don't get to because there's so many other important appointments as well. But hopefully after today, we'll talk about some easy things to do that can help us feel better to even help all those other things that we're trying to manage. That's so overwhelming.

[04:49] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oftentimes we, uh, the part of our body that hurts the most brings our attention, and we don't realize that there are other things like the feet that could affect that. So cervical instability could actually be improved by working on our feet, right? And we want to catch all the low-hanging fruit. Yeah, we definitely don't want to miss a relatively easy intervention like orthotics and, and addressing—I'm not saying that addressing feet pain is easy, but, um, we don't want to miss those lower risk type things.

[05:23] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yeah. Yeah. No, there are some very simple things we can do that help right away that help us be able to stand longer, walk longer. Like one of my patients last week who is really cervical instability and has already had surgery for Chiari and severe headaches and just extreme fatigue and pain. By some other things we did with the low-hanging fruit, pelvis and feet, she was able—she's like, I was doing the dishes at 8 o'clock last night. I'm so amazed. And so we were focused on the pain, but it was really the posture, the fatigue that was helped so much. And then her brain was like, oh, I could do that.

[06:06] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

[06:06] Lisa Ralston, PT: And so, you know, it's fun for me because a simple little thing we do can sometimes have a big effect, um, that we weren't even thinking of.

[06:17] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So, and, and it's all about function at the end of the day, right? We're addressing things that we can modify to improve function.

[06:26] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yeah.

[06:27] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So that's great. Fantastic. Can you run us through some common causes of foot pain in people that have joint hypermobility?

[06:36] Lisa Ralston, PT: Um, yes, so as we talked about, posture is number one, and alignment. So, um, alignment of the whole body is really important. And when we have malalignment anywhere up the chain, from—we could start with the feet, or we could start with pelvis and knee hyperextension, uh, femoral internal rotation, um, you know, any kind of malalignment will set that posture off and contribute to increased load or things that cause pain. So, and of course, we'll talk about excess pronation. So our foot, basically our foot has two jobs. So it is a little simple, even though there's multiple joints and tissues. Our foot pronates to adapt to the ground, and our foot needs to supinate, come back into supination where the arch comes up to push, to be stable, to push off the ground, to propel forward. And so, if pronation's not a bad thing, these are not bad things or things that are wrong with us, it's just how we're made. And so that's one of my approaches is, even if we have too much pronation or we're living there or it's too fast, that's what we want to address, that function of pronation. Or if somebody's living in a supinated position where all the weight's on the outside of the foot and the arch is up all the time and there's too much stress and load, then, you know, we can address that. So I'd say those are the two most, the three most common: posture and alignment, excessive pronation, excessive supination. And also what I see probably more so with EDS is a hypermobile first ray. And I see very tight gastrocnemius and soleus Achilles. And, and I don't know if there's studies on that, maybe you can tell me, I haven't seen them. But even if somebody has a lot of pronation, flat-footed or supinated, in EDS, we tend to have tight calves. And I think that's the body's way to stabilize the back of the body because so much is unstable other directions. And so, um, I think those can be causes. Posture and alignment, excessive pronation, excessive supination, a hypermobile first ray, meaning big toe where it actually looks like a high arch but it's not, but that joint's hypermobile. Um, also EDS patients tend to have more forefoot rotation. And so that's something we'll talk about because that usually is not addressed with foot providers in my experience with patients that come see me. And in the EDS population, and I don't know why, this is another research I'd want to see, it tends to be more the right foot in our dancers and skaters that are more hypermobile in the forefoot, forefoot varus or valgus, and first ray. So there's some things that we can do to support that and not correct it, but just support it so that we can function better and be a little more stable. And then of course, lack of proprioception, right? Just because we have that range of motion doesn't mean that's where we should be functioning. So learning where joints are in space so that we can function with better joint alignment. So I think all of those things um, and then fatigue, right? So all the things that go with EDS—overall fatigue, pain contributes, even overall body pain contributes to foot pain, right? Because we have those days where you're just on the couch, you can't function, or you have a big setback because we did too much, and then we're sort of immobile, and then we feel better, so we go do too much, right? And so that contributes to pain as well.

[10:36] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So yeah, definitely. I remember the first time that I heard the phrase pain begets pain, and I was dealing with my own EDS and really kind of at a low point in my life at that point in time. So I'd already finished my entire anesthesia residency and had been working for quite a while, but I was dealing with my own health issues. And when I heard that, I was like, oh, that's really interesting. But it does seem to really fit, whether it's people that have EDS or not. I've noticed in people that I know, it seems like if they get one pain problem, then they're more likely to get another pain problem. We do have lots of data to back this up. And so that's where it's, to me, so important to try to do a better job with young people and try to help their pain as early as possible so that they don't develop other pain problems, you know. And so we have such a huge responsibility in that. We have a lot of young people that have pain, and sometimes there's that low-hanging fruit there. So yeah, they need to see somebody, you know, sooner rather than later that can address the pain that they're having.

[11:46] Lisa Ralston, PT: Two things I thought of with that is one, absolutely, and I think there's research, but if somebody's pain is more than a 5 or 6 out of 10, we know that neurologically muscles shut down so that we don't load. And so it's okay if we don't have zero pain, but we need to have pain that's low enough so our nervous system doesn't overreact and shut down muscles. So it's not always that we're weak, it's just things sort of shut down. So if we get the pain down, what could be with support, with manual therapy, you know, whatever, lots of different treatment modalities, we get the pain down, muscles fire, help with support and alignment, that function improves. And that's key, you know, for the nervous system and, and all that. The second thing is, you know, after, in my clinic, I was seeing a lot more children with hypermobility problems and issues. And so probably from age 7 up, I was seeing kids. And when I, after working the Winter Olympics and with elite athletes, one of my loves I wanted to get back to was working with kids, because we can catch things early while they're developing. And it might even be scoliosis, right? Because there's a scoliotic hypermobility, and kids are not even checked for scoliosis a lot anymore, right? And so, but there's also, there are biomechanists and doctors who will tell parents that we should not put kids in orthotics. And so there are two opposing philosophies. In fact, I was at a meeting last week and a mother with her 11, 12-year-old, and she said, oh, the doctor, I know my son, his feet are so flat like his dad's and he's having a lot of pain and he can't run. And the doctor said, oh no, don't do orthotics. And so it's still out there, that belief. And I'm not saying orthotics are appropriate for every child. However, it is so cool when you see a child who's so malaligned because of hypermobility or other reasons. It could be an injury, or it could be an illness. For example, my daughter had leukemia when she was 4, and she's a bendy body. She's now 23, but during treatment and the steroids, she was so floppy. And I actually—so this was 20 years ago—I made little custom orthotics for her. We put them on and she ran around the kitchen island. And so that's so cool when you see a kid, because they don't, but it doesn't like the tack. They're usually really good with it. Like their bodies will just respond. They don't have 40 years of other stuff. So, um, I, that's one of the things I've sort of got back to from selling my practices. Um, I do enjoy working with kids and helping them to develop and learn about their bodies and their awareness and what the pain means and how to manage it and nervous systems and all of that stuff, hydration and recovery, you know, all of that stuff to help their bodies feel better so they can go to school and do what activities they want to do.

[15:08] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, absolutely. That's what we want. We want kids to be able to be as normal you know, active and enjoying life and going to school and everything. So, so that's really great. And thank you for sharing that story about your daughter because yeah, that is a great, great example. And in terms of how you approach hypermobile patients, how do you approach them differently than non-hypermobile ones?

[15:34] Lisa Ralston, PT: Well, I, I love it when my hypermobile patients provide a thorough history for me. So even if they're coming to me with hip pain, knee pain, or foot pain, like a lot of times referred from another therapist or doctor or other patients, and it's for foot pain. However, I'm still thinking of the entire person and systems, all systems. And so like Dr. Linda, you have a page available, I think, for people to help fill out a history. So I love it when patients send me a page ahead of time. I also have an EDS form where they can sort of check off, you know, are they having headaches? Are they having dysautonomia, POTS, GI issues, skin issues, their other injury history, ankle sprain surgeries, all of that. I want to know all of that. And then what's important is when they come to see me, it's what's important to them at that point in time. Because, right, you know, last week might be totally different than today. And so at that visit, we're addressing, okay, where are we now? Because it can be so overwhelming, even though I'm just treating the foot. I know if we do a few things, we can feel better all over. And so I address the hypermobile patient with their entire systems first. Then I start with, you know, what's important to them, what activities they want to do, where they're at. One of my patients right now can only walk maybe a quarter mile. And our goal is to get her walking a mile. And I have a couple of patients who have gotten now to 2 miles with some support. And I don't see patients several times a week anymore. I see them maybe once a month. And so it's not an involved process. It's just, so then I really start, I look at posture, entire body. Mobility. I might take into account Brighton score, but that's not really my focus because hypermobile bodies get stiff areas. And, you know, as we age, we have changes in our joint mobility, right? So I'm going to look at spine and pelvis is very important. And so I check mobility of spine, especially lumbosacral, L5-S1 is really important, and pelvis. And hip range of motion. So, um, uh, if somebody's not moving in their L5-S1 and their sacrum, their hip range of motion might be limited, which it can affect their foot during gait. And so I'm going to check range of motion and standing. I'm going to look at alignment, and I can get a lot of information. And then we do a squat, single leg squat. I can also see proprioception and alignment when we're on one leg, because when we're walking when we're on one leg, you know, 60% of the time we need to be able to stabilize on one foot and one leg, which is a problem for most of people that I, most patients I see. They come in, they really can't stand on one leg because of pain, because of malalignment, because of instability, for example. So we'll do a single leg squat that gives me information. I'm looking at the entire chain, their foot. Does the navicular, the midarch drop? Are they, you know, is the femur rotating in? Is their pelvis dropping? That tells me there's some weakness in the hip and core. And so I'm looking at all of that, even if I'm treating their big toe. And then of course, watching walk, and then taking into account what shoe wears they are in and they like to wear. I'm not gonna, I don't want to push what I think they should wear. Especially kids, right? They're gonna, I'm gonna try to fit what will help their function with what they like. And so, you know, I'm thinking of that ahead of time. And I don't think everybody needs orthotics. We can talk about like how I decide, but so I'm looking at function, both legs together, single leg. Do they have a bend in their ankle, their subtalar joint, full squat with good alignment, or do they have to turn their foot out? To do that. And then we go to hip range of motion, hip strength, hip stability. So I'm checking all the hip muscles, rotators, checking. Then I go to the foot and ankle. And here's where maybe the difference is from what my patients tell me is, and I'd say just real quickly, I assess heel motion. So the heel needs to move not just one direction, but evert 3 or 4 degrees. And if somebody's had a lot of ankle sprains, often they lose that rear foot valgus, even in a flat-footed hypermobile foot. So that's probably the first thing I check. Then I come up the lateral side of the foot, the cuboid should move, and then the 4th and 5th metatarsal should be more mobile than 2 and 3. So I check each metatarsal, they should move like piano keys. A lot of times 2 and 3 are stuck together, so then 2 gets loaded too much. And then I'll check first ray, big toe. Big toe is very important. How is that big toe? Hypomobile, too stiff at the different joints, or is it hypermobile? So one joint and hypo another joint. So I want to know the function of that big toe because our big toe is big for a reason, right? It's 60% bigger because we need to—we're supposed to push off the big toe, not our little toes. And so that's where the posture and function of the foot and just putting our hands on the foot to feel, and I'm also kind of treating and I'm explaining to the patient what, you know, about their foot, you know, and I might find this in a foot that's living in pronation and flat-footed, and I might find it in a higher arch foot. I'm checking each joint to see what's going on. And so I would say that's—oh, and scoliosis. I'm going to look for scoliosis in kids. And then we're going to look at shoes. What shoes are they wearing? For example, like a Hoka might be good for a stiff high arch foot. But a Hoka could actually make a hypermobile excessively pronated foot worse with knee hyperextension, making knee hyperextension worse because it's too soft. And it can also decrease our proprioception if it's too soft for some people. So not everybody I would want to put in a soft cushiony Hoka. It actually could make their proprioception worse and their knee hyperextension worse.

[22:28] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Interesting. It's so interesting that you mentioned Hoka specifically because that's what I—I'm not wearing them right now. Right now I'm wearing my Oofos, which I just have to, since we are recording video, I love these things. They have awesome arch support, they're nice and cushy. I have my indoor pairs and my outdoor pairs.

[22:47] Lisa Ralston, PT: Like a recovery sandal? Yes, yes, love those, love those.

[22:52] Dr. Linda Bluestein: But I, but I do also wear Hokas, so I'm curious which—what type of foot would benefit from a shoe like a Hoka?

[23:00] Lisa Ralston, PT: And, you know, Hoka has different ones out now, so I can't say all Hokas. When they first came out, they were higher platform cushier. I can't remember which, you know, which line, but, and they've changed now, so they have some that are not as cushy. So it really, that's where I would assess your foot, and, and your right and left foot could be different, but I would assess your foot mobility. And generally, Hokas are better for a stiffer foot, somebody who needs more shock absorption, right? So maybe a higher arch stiffer foot, joints are stiff, ankle stiff, and that gives you that aid in mobility. And so that's when—that's the type of person, banana foot, as you talk to with the dancers, you know, basically a high arch supinated pes cavus foot, I would be more likely to put in a Hoka.

[23:53] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So you just used a lot of fantastic words in that last sentence. So I did. And of course, ballet dancers that are listening to this or dance medicine physical therapists are going to know what you mean by a banana foot. I know what you mean by a banana foot, but can you distill that down for other people just so they know? Because I feel like that was really important what you just said.

[24:17] Lisa Ralston, PT: So a foot that has the innate structure that is a high arch and the big toe can point down, you can make like a dome with your foot and it points easily and the calf tends to be very tight, would be basically a high arch stiff foot versus somebody who's very flat-footed. So if you step in the sand or in water, you see a flat, you know, the banana foot. If you have water and you're by the pool, you're not—you're going to see a huge space between your heel and toes. Yeah. And often the higher arch foot supinated will have more motion in forefoot valgus and the toe extensors work harder. So if somebody—and I have, it seems like 1 out of every 10 patients will actually have a foot that is more pronated and then a foot that is stiff. And so they have one of each, right?

[25:48] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

[24:17] Lisa Ralston, PT: And that's where, as we get into some orthotics, orthotics can fail because a lot of labs will make both kind of similar, whereas some labs could make it very different based on flexibility of the shell, contact with the foot. But I do have patients, and I don't know that it would be more with the EDS population, although maybe that would be another study.

[25:48] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, that would be a fascinating study. I honestly had not heard that before, that the right and left foot you know, can be that different. And for people that are listening to this, Lisa is doing a lot of different motions with her hands, which is great. And I would really encourage people to also watch this on YouTube so that they can see, you know, the different things that you're showing. And I know you're going to show some orthotics later as well.

[26:13] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yeah. Oh, and I was going to say, sorry, but with scoliosis, we might tend to see a different right and left foot because as the pelvis or spine side bends and rotates, one foot drops down, one foot lifts up. So I would say scoliosis is the other time I would need to do a very different right and left foot orthotic to create a better posture.

[26:35] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, sure, that makes sense. And one other thing that I know that we had talked about when we're talking about shoes, about high tops, or I think you also call them like 3/4 top. Could you just explain a little bit about that and what you suggest?

[26:50] Lisa Ralston, PT: Mm-hmm. So somebody has a really hypermobile foot, let's say they've had multiple ankle sprains and there's some instability and they're like, well, you know, I don't really want surgery. We know there's ligament damage, we know there's inherent instability in that foot and ankle, we're trying strengthening, a lot of time the braces are too thick and cumbersome, right? And so I think with an orthotic, I would do a deeper heel cup and more contact. And then in a high-top shoe, it just gives a little more external stability and feedback for that postural alignment and support so that you can—it can improve that posture. And, you know, shoes—the other thing with, you know, a lot of newer shoes now, if you squeeze—I should go grab, or if you have your shoes—yes, please. Okay. So a lot of, a lot of the teenagers I work with, they like, you know, really cute tennis and Nikes, but a lot of them do not have a firm heel counter. So if you take your tennis shoe above the heel and you squeeze the back, it's nice and firm. And this is a regular low cut, so if you're wearing a 3/4 or high top, usually you don't have to worry about this, but in a tennis shoe or a regular, you know, fun shoe, if there's no, if the heel counter is not firm, you're going to have less control with instability side to side. The other thing is look at the nice kind of wide wedge, which can give a little more stability. You know, years ago when Nike came out, some of them were very narrow here. I treated a lot of lateral sprains because, and so firm heel counter can give some support court, that's pretty basic, a little bit wider at the bottom. And then, you know, a good test if somebody's hypermobile, and not all shoes are made at the same factory. So if I have my Brooks and I go buy it at a discount store, it's made at a different factory for a discount store. The foam can be different, the footbed's different. So go into—I won't name a name brand discount store, but you can think of one and take, go find a Saucony or Brooks and see, it should just bend where my toe breaks easily, right? But a lot of those shoes you can bend in half and like a pretzel. And so, you know, there's two in the orthopedic and sports medicine world. There's a whole like, you know, oh, our shoe, there's a whole sort of trend now in the opposite direction of we're wearing shoes with too much support. That's why we're weaker. So I'd say this is different in the EDS population. I, for a patient that has some instability or hypermobility, I do want a midsole that gives support, that is not bending it, the shoe in half and flexing. And so, um, some orthopedic sports medicine providers have the theory that, well, we just need to strengthen and we need to do all this. Well, some populations that's true, but not all our patients. So those are things I look for too, and I check my patient's shoes and give them suggestions when they go shopping, because even though it says Saucony or Brooks or whatever, it can be made—and also the right and left foot can be made at a different factory. What?

[26:50] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, really?

[26:50] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yes.

[30:18] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So if you buy your shoes from a regular store, like, say you go to a store where there's certain stores, there's one in Green Bay that I I can't remember the name of, but it was amazing. I had all these like incredible comfort brand shoes. If you go to a store like that, do you think you're more likely to have the right and shoe, right and left shoe made at the same factory?

[30:40] Lisa Ralston, PT: Well, it's more of the not made for discount. So, you know, companies will have a line, like just like a designer might have a line that's made for a discount store versus what they sell at Neiman Marcus or whatever, for example.

[30:18] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right.

[30:40] Lisa Ralston, PT: So, um, shoes can be the same thing. And so I would just check it wherever. Running stores usually buy directly from New Balance or Brooks or whatever, right? They're buying direct and selling, and they are priced a little higher. But even if you find—I still look for them on sale, but I test them with my hands. Does it have a firm heel counter? Where does it bend at the toe? Does it, does it collapse midsole? And if it's somebody that needs support and hypermobility, I'm going to want that midsole to have some good support with some cushion.

[31:32] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure.

[31:33] Lisa Ralston, PT: And how we tie our shoes is important. That's another. So treating kids—

[31:40] Dr. Linda Bluestein: you're blowing my mind right now. Okay.

[31:43] Lisa Ralston, PT: Oh my gosh, I'm sorry. All these things I didn't write down.

[31:47] Dr. Linda Bluestein: No, this is great.

[31:50] Lisa Ralston, PT: So, you know, treating kids, actually tying shoes becomes a thing.

[31:55] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure.

[31:56] Lisa Ralston, PT: So parents, here you go, I'm your advocate. Shoes are tied, you know, we have ties for a reason, and we can use this, and this applies to skates, soccer shoes, cleats, hiking boots, anything. We can, when we tie, we don't want to just pull to the outside, we want to sort of pull, we want to pull that arch together, right? So when I'm tying my shoe, I want to make sure that I'm, you know, pulling this way and not pulling out to the side. I want to hug my arch. And there's a lot of kids that don't ever tie their shoes now. Right.

[32:39] Dr. Linda Bluestein: They just slide them on and off and ruin the heel part.

[32:42] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yes. Yes. Yeah. So I, in that situation, I'll approach the kiddo with whatever their goals are. If they are an athlete, they want to run, I say, okay, fine, kick around, do that. But when you are doing, like, land, you know, conditioning, and working with a trainer, you need to make sure you've got this appropriate support and tie your shoes. So I mean, treating kids, it's kind of, I mean, just that simple little thing can make a difference for them.

[33:16] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Interesting. Wow, that's really fascinating. And I'm curious to get your take, as we were talking about brands. I have some, like, a couple of dressier brands that I—excuse me—that I really love. One of them is Aetrex, spelled A-E-T-R-E-X. I love Aetrex. Yeah, I don't know how I'm pronouncing that right. Um, Vionic is also okay, but Aetrex is probably my favorite. Do you have any recommended brands for either bendy feet or just people with foot pain?

[34:37] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yeah. Obeyo, Naot, Mephisto.

[33:48] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh yes, Naot are great.

[33:50] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yeah, I like Naot sandals, you know, and so it kind of depends on season because, you know, pre-April, March, we're in sandals more. Bionic, I have used, and the orthotics we'll talk about are actually made by Vasyli Bionic, although they have sold, it's a different corporation now. So some of them are not—don't have enough arch support in them. But their slippers are good, like, you know, for around the house. But now there's so many more recovery shoes and slip-on shoes with arch support. Chaco is a good footbed sandal for high arch. And that's a good one. And, you know, Keens and Merrells are good.

[34:35] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Keens are nice and wide.

[34:37] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yeah, they have a good 4-foot—yeah, yeah. So, um, yeah, I think all of those—Obeyo, Aetrex, um—

[34:45] Dr. Linda Bluestein: how do you spell Obeyo?

[34:49] Lisa Ralston, PT: I think it's O-B-E-O.

[34:51] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I, I just want to make sure because I will have links to all of those in the show notes so people can find them more easily.

[34:58] Lisa Ralston, PT: Okay. Yeah, yeah. And I would, you know, in our area I refer a lot of our patients to a store that sells specialty shoes. So a lot of them have a podiatrist on site and they carry good supportive shoes. I'll just try to give recommendations with their foot type and steer them in a direction to try.

[35:21] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, sure. Okay, great. And when you are finding and treating bendy feet, I know we talked talked about this briefly earlier, but if you could elaborate a little bit more about, you know, do all bendy feet, are they all overpronated? Because of course that's something that we see quite often, that the pronated, the rolling in, right? And does everyone have flat feet or, you know, tell us more about that.

[35:46] Lisa Ralston, PT: No, I would say it's probably 75-80% flat feet, and then I would say 20-30% higher arch stiff foot is what I see in the EDS population. And then there's a small percentage that have one of each. So I'd say that's more common. And I think in the general population, overpronation is probably 95%. You know, it's, it tends to be more common anyway. And oh, I think in regards to that, pronated or supinated with EDS, if we're looking at treating kids and trying to catch things earlier. One of the things I like, and I tell parents, if I see them usually by around 8 or 9 years old, how they are orthopedically, meaning how their legs and their feet are overpronated, like if they're super flat-footed, their arches are on the ground, if they're like that at age 9, that's probably how they're going to be. And so I'm pretty confident that if we start a little bit of support, we're not correcting, but we just want to create good alignment, for that child while they're developing and growing. I think, you know, it's okay around that age, that's a good time to sort of check that. Um, because as an adult, it's going to be more of that. And then some adults with EDS, um, they were more flexible as children, right, more pronated. And then either the arch can drop more, right, after having kids or just living the arch can drop more, or injuries. And so then you add on other variables to that foot that already was maybe overpronated, or a sprained ankle, which can then cause stiffness. And so you avoid—or plantar fasciitis, so you avoid—or pain under the big toe, so you avoid, and then you're standing and learning in supination. So it can change. I don't see it as like, I don't know, a specific, like, diagnosis, sort of. That makes sense?

[37:53] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, sure. Yeah, definitely. I think that's one thing that I was—I went to a course that was specifically about working with dancers, and I don't know if you've heard of the physical therapist Lisa Howell, but I took a couple of courses from her and they were really, really fantastic. For anyone that does dance medicine, I'll also link that in the show notes. But, but she said something that has really stuck with me, and she said the body is in a constant state of reformation.

[34:58] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yeah, yeah.

[38:23] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And that, that gives us hope because that tells us we can also make choices that will help how our body is, um, you know, reformatting itself and realigning itself.

[38:35] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yeah, yeah, absolutely. I took, gosh, 2011-12, I went to the Harkness Center for Dance Medicine course years ago, and that was really good. I enjoyed that. So, but yeah, no, absolutely, we're all changing and evolving, and, you know, even our nervous system can affect some of that, or our vascular system. You know, and so, um, I just see people, meet people where they're at and that's where we're, and that's where we're at that day. And that's what we work on to get them to a place that's better.

[39:15] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Yeah, for sure. Awesome. So, uh, I want to talk about people who have quote failed PT. Um, I've had a lot of patients say to me. You know, I talk to them about going to physical therapy, and I'm a lifer, by the way. I've been in and out of physical therapy since I was a teenager, and it's like the best tool for me. But I have a lot of people who say to me, it doesn't work for me. So let's talk about when people say that, like, what are some things that maybe they need to be done differently or that have happened in the past? Of course, none of us—you weren't there, I wasn't there—we don't know for sure, but like, thoughts about that. And then, and then let's talk about orthotics maybe after that, unless if that kind of rolls into this question.

[40:00] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yeah. Yeah, I think it does because I get a lot of people that come and they've tried different orthotics and they didn't work and, and we'll talk about why. Yeah, I mean, I really, I mean, my patients tell me because they've been to all the providers. So I think what's different is looking at all systems, and it might be including sleep and anxiety, sleep apnea, GI issues, nervous system. So making sure vagus nerve is, you know, if our threshold of our nervous system is up here, nothing I'm going to do is going to help. And if I give that patient whose nervous system is up here a bunch of exercises and deadlifts and squats, I'm not going to strengthen, or if my pain is a 7, 8, I'm not going to strengthen. So I think that's one mistake we make as providers is, and, and, you know, our health—you've talked about this—our healthcare system makes it difficult, um, in a 20-minute visit or 30 minutes to address all this. So part of my job is to sort of take all this overwhelmingness and narrow it down to 1 or 2 things that are going to help us function, help my patient function. And so, um, I think one of the biggest mistakes we do as physical therapists is, and, and because there's also a trend towards higher level strengthening right now. So if you look at physical therapy clinics, um, they are, they look like a big field, a gym and big weights and equipment.

[41:37] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, really? Interesting.

[41:38] Lisa Ralston, PT: Oh yeah. So that's the trend. And, you know, that strengthening is really important. Well, it is, but we have to have our nervous system and our system aligned and able to accept that training and firing of muscles. And so low load, it's probably not the first time everybody's heard this, but go slow and low load. And so that's where I might start somebody on the reformer, or we literally just line things up and practice standing with correct alignment from our foot, our arch. We forget about the feet, right? So when we're working on proprioception and balance in a double-legged mini squat, we need to maintain our arch and not grip with our toes so that we're using our core and our pelvic floor. And so I think, and then being able to modify. So my patients tell me, 'cause I'll ask them, I'm just with my patients, I don't really think about what I do. And they tell me that I'm able to help them modify. So let's say their low back and pelvis, they're having a lot of pain, and I give them maybe a muscle energy technique, or their hip is pinching. I do a very gentle technique, and if they're not able to do it the traditional treatment way, then I modify it so that they can do this self-treatment without pain. That's the key, right? We have to modify. We have to either modify by position, by load, by, um, so maybe, you know, um, and so it's modification so that that patient is in a safe place with their body and their nervous system, and then they'll respond.

[43:22] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That makes sense. The nervous system is so important. And I think a lot of people don't realize, and I think part of that too is when your nervous system is really, really jacked up, your muscles get really, really tight. And a lot of the pain in our bodies comes from our muscles. We might have arthritis and different things going on, but it's possible that the pain is coming a lot from, from the muscles and not as much from the, from the joints and trigger points in the muscles and things like that. So getting that nervous system. Yeah.

[43:53] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yeah. Like one of my patients last week that has a lot of issues, EDS, and just really neck and shoulders and arms flared up. And they have degenerative neck issues, some instability, stenosis, right? All that stuff that you might see on an MRI. But I watched her breathe. And when she was—she was trying to breathe to calm her nervous system. Like she knew she needed to do that. But when I watched her breathe, all these accessory muscles were doing all the breathing. And so, and so we just slowed it down and we got into a position where she could relax these muscles and she's like, oh, and then the air and her diaphragm could move and then her arm pain went away. So sometimes it's pretty, you know, and that's where I think therapy might fail because we're so busy and we're trying to do our notes and deal with insurance authorizations and we're like, oh, you know, sorry, insurance companies, if you're listening, but, well, if they're listening, I have a few things to say.

[43:53] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Me too. Me too.

[43:53] Lisa Ralston, PT: But, uh, that's one reason, I mean, I got out of my clinic because I just want to take care of patients and not be, not be focused on that. So I think when we get in a setting where there's 3 patients in that hour and you've got to document and I was able to just slow down and get this patient in a quiet, safe place so that they could actually get their body to do it and relax and get the pain to go away. I didn't even touch them. I did after, I did a little bit. But, um, so yeah, the nervous—even if I'm just treating the foot or the patient sent to me for orthotics, it's never just about the knee, the foot, right?

[45:57] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

[43:53] Lisa Ralston, PT: And I think that's the other way our health system fails because we have to, you know, in a doctor's office you might see, oh well, if you bring up another issue or body part, you've got to make another appointment and make another copay, right?

[45:57] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

[45:58] Lisa Ralston, PT: So that's where physical therapists, we tend to get it all. Um, so I think physical therapy will fail when we don't meet the patient where they're at. And help them get that pain down, nervous system down, postural alignment, um, and for them to feel safe to move. Because we can move no matter what state we're in, and we start to feel better when we feel okay to move. Yeah. And, um, so I think finding your provider that you feel safe with, that you know will maybe push you a little bit when you're doing okay, and then knows when to back off and how to modify when you're at a place where it's not a good day.

[46:42] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, I've definitely been to physical therapists that are really great at those modifications because I have various different problems, and others that are like, nope, this is the exercise. And so I totally get what you're saying. And, and same thing I think applies, you know, to my practice, is it just takes a much longer period of time with the type of approach that I take. So it's probably a similar, you know, corollary.

[47:07] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yeah. Yeah. And I refer out. So once I kind of see if I think, well, their pain is really due to some other things, I'm going to try to refer out. Or if the cardiovascular issue is really the big problem, you know, I'm going to ask you or Patty, or, you know, I'm going to try to refer out so that that patient can address those needs first and still give them a few things to help with you know, what we're working on. But acknowledging that, you know, you know, they're not crazy, right? It's just, it's just one thing we need to work on to get moving better.

[47:44] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, yeah, definitely. And tell us about orthotics and how some people have failed orthotics. You know, I hear that too. I know I tried that, it didn't work.

[47:54] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yeah. So I've done custom orthotics for, let's see, I've been practicing 33 years. I think I've done orthotics for, I don't know, maybe 25, 30 years and using different labs and different types and different materials in the old days. And a lot of orthotics failed because they're too hard. So there's different materials and there's also how we assess and decide the orthotic and then there's also how the lab makes the orthotic, right? So when I'm—one, not everybody needs an orthotic, but the one reason they fail is because we need to assess and feel, is the foot and joints hypermobile, or is it stiff, or is it a combination? And what kind of support does that foot need to facilitate good posture? So I think that's the mistake, is if we go to a provider that just like looks at a foot, casts, gives an orthotic, and they're not looking at posture, or flexibility in the foot, they're going to fail. And if we just put like a correction on the bottom or whatever, and we don't address the body's posture and the forces, they're going to fail. And it also depends on what activities we're doing. So if I have a runner, there's not a lot of heel contact, it's it's crazy, but this is still done all the time. We don't need corrections on the heel in a runner for most runners. So, um, anyway, and athletes like a heel or a skate or a ballerina, they're not on their heel, so they fail for that reason. They fail with materials that are picked, shock absorption versus enough support to create good alignment. The third thing is the way the lab makes the orthotic. And sometimes we cast, like some people get casted in standing, right? So you stand in a foam. Well, if you're flat-footed and that navicular or your arch is on the ground and you're standing, that's probably not the right casting technique for that patient. If you have a stable neutral foot and you stand there, it's probably okay, right? It's going to meet your foot. But so the, the lab that I've used the last 23 years is a total contact, which is different, and there's no correction. So basically it's a partial weight-bearing with the joint in neutral, joints in neutral. And when the lab—and then my job is to assess the flexibility in the foot. So this podiatrist engineer created, he calls it a Gibly test, and so I assess the rear foot, the midfoot, and I give in a foot flexibility assessment, and then the lab calibrates body weight, the flexibility in the foot, and the activity level, the velocity. So if I have a skater or if I just have somebody walking, I'm going to do something different because the load is different. And so with total contact and calibrating how the foot is, the body weight. When it's total contact, I don't know if you can see this, when your foot, when your foot comes off the ground, the orthotic stays right with you. Traditional custom orthotics, you'll see a gap, and you can test that. So for those of you listening, if you're, if you have custom orthotics and you're seated, put your orthotic under your foot and just lift your heel up and keep that orthotic under your foot and see if there's a gap under your arch. So if there's this big gap here and then you're—and then you load and you're walking mid-stance and then it hits this orthotic, a lot of people it doesn't help because you've still got these forces sort of going like that. But if it stays with you, it's maintaining that posture throughout the gait, which is our goal. I don't want to correct, I just want to facilitate alignment and posture. So that's how it's different. That's what I do that's a little bit different. I do have semi-custom as well. We'll talk about the Vionic or Vasyli. These are the same company but out of Australia. This is for a high arch supinated foot, and we can talk about specifics of that. And then so I have so many patients that previous orthotics have failed, and it's because the flexibility, the hypermobility and stiffness of the foot wasn't addressed. They just took a mold, and, and, and right versus left wasn't addressed. So there is—there, you know, depending on the foot flexibility, if the foot is really stiff, it can get—be a little bit longer to get used to because you're putting something on a stiff foot. Kids, they just go right away. Unless they have some tactile issues, and we, you know, we don't want anything bugging them that way, you know. So yeah, that's, that's the difference, I think, is facilitating that good posture and alignment, taking into account the foot's flexibility, and posture. And then I want to put them on and look and see how that alignment looks when they're on one leg, double leg, how they walk, and that kind of thing.

[53:32] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure, that, that makes sense. And are there situations in which—I mean, obviously cost is probably one situation in which people would purchase a, you know, something over-the-counter kind of a thing.

[53:44] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yeah.

[53:45] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Could you talk a little bit about, a little bit more about that?

[53:49] Lisa Ralston, PT: When you're talking about failed orthotics, besides the orthotic and casting, what's really important is that the foot be functioning. So with the orthotic, it's important to go to a provider that feels and assesses the function of the foot. For example, if I have a tight Achilles, tight gastrocnemius, it can pull my heel a certain direction, right? So if I just stick an orthotic in there and I haven't addressed the bend at the ankle, the tight Achilles, the movement of the metatarsals, that orthotic can fail, right? Because the body is not ready for that support. So I think it's an important point is the assessment and the function and movement of the foot needs and lower leg needs to be addressed so that the orthotic can support them. Just like a knee brace, if we're trying to support knee hyperextension but we don't address tight hip flexors or whatever, or, you know, position of the knee, that brace is not going to help, right? And also, we want that brace to have good contact if it's a supportive brace, and so that's where that contact of the orthotic—so, okay. So I just want to add that in that that's why the assessment's so important with the orthotic and not just getting an orthotic, and I think that's why so many fail. So while we're waiting for the orthotic, we're doing some foot mobility exercises with balls, we're getting the metatarsals to move, we're getting the cuboid to move, the heel to rock, we're massaging soft tissues, we're getting all that ready for that orthotic. Um, so yeah, okay, so different orthotics, right? Is that your question?

[55:34] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Uh, yes, yes, because I know some people, they either can't come to see you to get orthotics or they might not be able to afford getting custom orthotics, so what do you suggest in that situation?

[55:47] Lisa Ralston, PT: So, you know, of course I'd want to assess, um, you know, if you know your foot is really flat-footed and and flexible, you know, the more support the better. So if it's an over-the-counter, you're going to want a nice deep heel cup. So a good brand might be Sole or Vasyli. You can see the name. This is actually a thin one for like a high shoe heel. This is for a higher arch supinated foot, has a deep heel cup, and it has a little more support laterally for the foot that has so much motion this way. So Vasyli used to only be issued through providers, but now my patients can just go online. So the blue Vasyli that's just kind of looks like this, and they're about $45, $55, and we do heat mold them a little bit, but you don't really have to. You can go online and find those stores are selling them, Rehab, Amazon, and so it's just kind of average pronation, I would recommend Vasyli, the blue one. If it's a high arch supinated foot, there's—it's called the Hoke, is that named after Brian Hoke? He's a physical therapist, H-O-K-E, and it has a deeper heel cup. It's made for supinated foot. If your Achilles is really tight, there's a little heel lift as well. This brand makes something called Easy Fit, and it, it has a little heel cup and it has cutouts. So I use that a lot for kids. It has a really nice arch, and they can stick it in little Converse and different shoes. I've used them in cheer shoes, like small. So Vasyli makes one called Easy Fit that you can just order and stick in different shoes. That's super easy and inexpensive. Sole, I mentioned, has on their website, you can sort of put—answer questions if you're more supinator and pronator, and they can help you decide which orthotic. And by the way, I don't make money off of any of these products. Disclaimer. Neither do I. I've sold a ton of them. And then Superfeet, like, you know, for kids, for some—for something kind of mild, they're Superfeet. They give a little bit of pronation control. They make some for skates. That sort of thing. And then the custom ones I charge—oh, and kids, they have kid sizes too. And there's some different ones. The custom for what I—I don't know if you want to know what I charge.

[58:24] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure. Yeah, it'd be great to know.

[58:26] Lisa Ralston, PT: So for evaluation, follow-up visit, one pair of orthotics is $425. So you don't pay for an extra visit with follow-up. We issue and communicate. So the first visit usually includes evaluating, sort of treating while I'm talking, casting, one pair of orthotics, and your follow-up visit. Then I usually give some things to work on at home and then just follow up by phone or email if we need to. And you can go on Sole Supports website and look for providers. In your state or area. I don't know about out of the country. And again, though, I would—it could be a provider that doesn't put their hands on you, right? I don't know. Even though the orthotic, I would still recommend finding a provider who's good with treating feet or who—and I don't know why there's not more. I get, you know, people are like, oh, you know, I've treated so many stinky hockey feet that doesn't even faze me. But, you know, just I think of either a therapist or it could be any kind of, you know, provider that can address the foot and moving the foot and that kind of thing. And there's a lot of videos now with self-treatment of feet.

[59:49] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, so what if a person comes to see you and they do the one-on-one evaluation and everything, but they want want a second pair of orthotics, how does that work?

[59:58] Lisa Ralston, PT: I don't—I do not charge any extra for that. If they're doing well and they like it, I can make any modifications. Like let's say they want a second pair for a dress shoe that's more narrow, or for a skate or something, or, you know, a soccer shoe. Second pair is $195, and they do not have to come in. I can just order it. I trim, so I pick different amounts of top covers or cushion. These are very old, by the way. And so they can just order a second pair. I trim them to fit in their shoe. Some people, if they have a lot of extra mobility in their forefoot, I add a balance called a sesamoid balance pad, and that can make a big difference, especially if toes are overworking trying to balance. And with proprioception, it just, it just, just sort of aligns that posture from this rotation the other way, and, you know, or I might need to add a metatarsal pad if there's one very painful metatarsal, or if somebody has neuroma, Morton's neuroma, where they have burning and pain in between their toes. But you can order these pads online to add under your shoe insert. To unload those metatarsals and that nerve pain.

[1:01:23] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So I have a lot of people that have had problems with their sesamoids, so I'm fascinated about how you might adapt the orthotic for that.

[1:01:32] Lisa Ralston, PT: So there's—sometimes I use a dancer pad. This is actually a sesamoid balance pad made by the—I'm just going to click on this and see—it's called Human Locomotion Motion is the website, and you can check that out. A dancer pad I put underneath the big toe and across metatarsals, and then it unloads those sesamoids, so it gives more support so that it sort of catches some of that load and decelerates it before those sesamoids hit the ground. And so I've used that a lot with dancers and skaters. The sesamoid balance pad I use if there's just so much hypermobility with rotation this way, that tends to work better. And it goes like—here's your foot, it goes like that. There's your big toe.

[1:02:27] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

[1:02:28] Lisa Ralston, PT: And this is under the fifth metatarsal.

[1:02:30] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

[1:02:31] Lisa Ralston, PT: So if you go to human locomotion, you can see that online.

[1:02:36] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, excellent. And again, I definitely encourage people to watch the YouTube if they can, because that's a great visual there. So, and in terms of the over-the-counter orthotics, is it best if people go to a store if they can, and that way they can maybe choose from a few varieties and be able to get their hands on them and that kind of thing?

[1:02:58] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yeah, you know, running shoe stores carry a lot more now, and they're more knowledgeable. So a lot of them running shoe stores will carry Superfeet, Sole, some Vasyli, Birkenstock even makes some cork footbeds that are pretty nice. So they could go do that. Again, you know, the shoe store person doesn't know your foot type, and so they don't necessarily know what to recommend. And so that's where sort of the specifics come in. But if you know you have a flat foot, the companies will generally kind of guide you. I would say look for a nice heel cup. That's helpful for control and stability. I'd say that's probably one of the first things I would check for hypermobile patients.

[1:03:47] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, and as we're getting close to the end here, can you talk a little bit about—I think one of the things that you had mentioned was self-mobilization. Of feet?

[1:03:56] Lisa Ralston, PT: Oh yeah, so one of the things we do is, um, we all get so stiff in our metatarsals, right, just with pain or whatever. And so I'll take like a little kitty ball, like a little foam ball, and if you're sitting, you place that ball under your foot, under those metatarsals, and you just gently press down to mobilize. You can move that ball back by the cuboid, under the lateral side of the foot, in front of the heel. And, and use the ball to sort of mobilize the joints up and down. And then of course you can use it to massage plantar fascia. You can put your heel on a ball and rock the heel to get mobility that way. You can also use the ball to sort of stretch by putting your toes on the ball and spreading your toes to create space around the ball. And so there's some just really nice foot mobility exercises. And, you know, even with EDS, what I find is we work a lot on mobility because there's some areas that are painful and are stiff.

[1:05:00] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

[1:05:00] Lisa Ralston, PT: And so maybe that's kind of one of the big differences is addressing those stiff painful areas is really helpful.

[1:05:08] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure. And what, what's that ball called again?

[1:05:12] Lisa Ralston, PT: Well, it could be a little kitty ball, like cats play with, like a little firm rubber ball. Um, kittens, cat, like, um, or, or, or like, um, just a small rubber ball. You don't want to use a marble, that's too painful, but just like a small bouncy ball, something that has a little bit of give, a little rubber ball. But usually, you know, kind of a quarter size or a little bigger, you can get each joint separately. And then we do a little bigger ball where you spread your toes around it. You can buy inexpensive balls on Amazon or Target, you know, department stores, and anything that sort of spreads and moves those bones in your feet can be really helpful. And then after you mobilize, then the next step is to work on stability and proprioception. So once our foot can move, then the next important phase is to know your foot's tripod. So you have your heel, your big toe, your little toe, and I'm, and I'm going to work on proprioception and balance and maintaining my arch with that tripod under my foot. Now that my foot has—I can load it everywhere, right? So after I mobilize, I want to work on some proprioception and balance in that correct alignment and posture of my foot, meaning arch, um, you know, not rocking out to the side, not collapsing in, I want to try to maintain that neutral, that's a great exercise without clenching my toes and using my core, all those things.

[1:06:48] Dr. Linda Bluestein: All those, all those good things. We know that you work a lot with ice skaters, and I just wanted to mention if people are listening and if they would like to hear an episode specifically about hypermobile ice skaters, please send me an email or a voicemail on my website or make a comment on one of the posts about this episode, because that's something that we've thought about doing, doing an episode about hypermobility in ice skaters. And that would be great to have Lisa back to talk about that. So you talked a lot about other factors that can influence foot pain, foot stability, that kind of thing, like, like stability in the pelvis. Are there other things that you do for that?

[1:07:27] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yes, so during my assessment, when I'm having somebody stand and I have them do a single leg squat, I'm looking at the arch. Is it collapsing? The alignment of the leg, the pelvis, and how much pain they're having. If they're having a lot of pain and they're really looking unstable, I often will have them try an SI belt. SI-Lok is one brand, or Serola, and we put on that belt and we retest single leg just trying to balance or single leg squat. And if they're more stable and that lessens their pain, then that is a tool we use for external support to aid in the nice posture to improve function. And at the same time, I'm looking at what the foot is doing. So maybe I don't need as much foot support if they're able to stabilize with their pelvis.

[1:08:17] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And do you use any of the Bauerfeind brands for that?

[1:08:20] Lisa Ralston, PT: Lumbar lady and the SI Lok or Serola. Those are the two I tend to use. Um, Serola is a little smaller. The SI Lok helps with a little more stability and it's pretty amazing. Patients will know, they'll just go, wow, like they can stand on one leg. It's easier to go from sit to stand. They have less hip pain or back pain and you know, it's pretty immediate. We know if that's going to help or not. And so I'll take that into account with what we're doing with the feet. Maybe we don't need as much postural support at the feet if we have good postural support at the pelvis, which can also help the neck, right?

[1:08:20] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right.

[1:08:55] Lisa Ralston, PT: It's all connected. It's all connected.

[1:08:55] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's the bottom line. Yeah. Um, okay, so last question besides, uh, the wrap-up here. Um, do you have any favorite hypermobility hacks?

[1:09:12] Lisa Ralston, PT: I have quite a few, I think, but, uh, well, we'll go to foot. Um, one I see, um, especially in a higher arch kind of dome foot, people complain of numbness, especially like if they're walking or in certain shoes. Um, and so it's very simple, you can just change the lacing where you crisscross. So if you feel the bump on the top of your foot, um, and if that lace hits right where that nerve—the nerve is close to the skin. And so what I do is we crisscross below, skip a hole, crisscross above it, and then you create a space for that nerve and you don't get the numbness on top.

[1:09:50] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, that's brilliant.

[1:09:54] Lisa Ralston, PT: So I've had quite a few patients that have gone to all these providers and I just change the lacing and they go hiking and they're like, that's good. Or they go walk on the treadmill.

[1:10:03] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So that's incredible.

[1:10:06] Lisa Ralston, PT: That's an easy one.

[1:10:07] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I love little hacks like that. That's amazing. Okay, so just to recap that, when you're saying that, that you, that you basically skip—actually, can you show us with the shoe?

[1:10:17] Lisa Ralston, PT: Yeah, so like in my foot, if I have—I'm real prominent right here and I'm getting numbness in my toes and foot, I would skip this cross. So you put the shoe on, you feel where that bump on top of your foot is, where it's kind of tender, and, and then you unlace and then skip a hole and cross above and below that bump in your foot. So you're unloading that spot right there because a lot of shoes have this, right, where we have the lace goes in, in that little strap there, and it pushes down on the top of the foot. Sometimes that can make that worse. So it just depends on where the bump in your foot is. Usually it's kind of right here, right where that lace crosses. And so if we just cross below and above, we can unload that strap pushing—that lace pushing on the nerve where that top of the foot is.

[1:11:10] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, fantastic. I love that one. Okay, where can people find more about you online?

[1:11:18] Lisa Ralston, PT: So I no longer have a website because I'm kind of just working part-time this last year. You can find me at lisa.ralstonpt.janeapp.com. So it's a scheduling platform. I can be emailed at lisa.ralstonpt@gmail.com. And I'd say that's probably the two ways.

[1:11:43] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, great. And we'll make sure to have that information in the, in the show notes. So well, Lisa, thank you so very much for coming on the Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD podcast today. This has been so incredibly informative. I know so many people are impacted by foot problems, so they're going to really enjoy all of the pearls of wisdom that you shared and find this so helpful. So thank you so much.

[1:12:09] Lisa Ralston, PT: Well, thank you for asking me. It was fun. I love talking about feet, obviously. I was worried I wasn't going to have enough to say.

[1:12:20] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I don't think we ran into that problem.

[1:12:22] Lisa Ralston, PT: Okay, good.

[1:12:23] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, thank you so very much again, and I will see you soon.

[1:12:27] Lisa Ralston, PT: Thank you. And thanks for all you do for all the patients and all the work and time that you put into this. It's just amazing.

[1:12:34] Dr. Linda Bluestein: You're very welcome. You're very welcome.

[1:12:36] Lisa Ralston, PT: Have a great day.

[1:12:40] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Thank you for listening to this week's episode of the Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD podcast. Visit our new website at bendybodiespodcast.com where you can now view guest profiles and show notes with links to products and journal articles. Leave me a comment, sign up for updates, leave a review or a voicemail, and access the podcast on your favorite player, all directly from our website. You may hear your voicemail in a future episode where we answer your question or dive into your gracious feedback. Follow us on Instagram at @bendy_buddies. We love seeing your posts and stories, so be a buddy and engage our community by using the hashtag BendyBuddy. That's hashtag B-E-N-D-Y-B-U-D-D-Y. You can also find me, Dr. Linda Bluestein, on Instagram, Facebook, Twitter, or LinkedIn at HypermobilityMD. Visit hypermobilitymd.com for information about medical services and one-on-one coaching. This podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine or other professional healthcare services, including the giving of medical advice. No doctor-patient relationship is formed. Do not disregard or delay obtaining medical advice for any medical condition you have. Opinions shared are that of the guest and do not necessarily represent the views of the host or any particular organization. Sponsorship of the podcast does not necessarily mean an endorsement. Thank you for being a part of our community, and we'll catch you next time on the Bendy Bodies Podcast.
