---
num: 91
title: '91. Hand Problems in EDS with Corinne McLees, OT and Hand Coach'
date: '2024-02-22'
duration: 1h 24m
description: "In this episode, Dr. Linda Bluestein and Corinne McLees discuss hand problems in EDS including pain, weakness, and injuries.\_ This conversation covers various topics related to hand problems, including ring splints, hand exercises, avoiding strain and hyperextension, tips for traveling, challenges of the medical system for chronic pain, hand pain with writing, hand pain and numbness in sleep, thumb pain and De Quervain's tendonitis, cubital tunnel syndrome, TFCC tear, trigger finger and so much\_ more."
tags:
  - EDS
  - Hypermobility
  - Pain
  - Physical Therapy
  - Injury Prevention
  - Patient Advocacy
audioUrl: >-
  https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH1374934843.mp3?updated=1721670784
videoUrl: 'https://youtu.be/-YeybFS6LT8'
snippets: []
guests:
  - 'Corinne McLees, OT'
guestImages: []
---
[00:24] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Welcome back, every bendy body. This is the Bendy Bodies Podcast, and I'm your host and founder, Dr. Linda Bluestein, the Hypermobility MD. This is going to be a great episode, so be sure to stick around until the very end so you don't miss any of our special hypermobility hacks. As always, this information is for educational purposes only and is not a substitute for personalized medical advice. Hand pain, weakness, and injuries are super common problems for those with joint hypermobility, so we're tackling this really important topic today. And we actually had over 40 questions submitted by followers of the free Instagram broadcast channel, which I was really excited about. If you want to submit a question for a future episode, search for Hypermobility MD on Instagram and tap on the broadcast channel icon near the bottom of the profile page. And then from there, you can turn on notifications. And I want to thank everyone who submitted a question for today. Your guest today is Corinne McLeese. She has a connective tissue disorder herself and has been an occupational therapist specializing in hands for almost 8 years. She is the owner of a hand clinic in Richmond, Virginia, and also virtually helps people around the world understand how hypermobility is often their missing hand pain puzzle piece and teaches them what to do about it so they can get back to their favorite activities with happier hands. Corinne, hello and welcome to Bendy Bodies.

[02:09] Corinne McLees, OT: Thank you so much, Dr. Bluestein. I'm so excited to be on here. I'm an avid listener and it's such an honor to be here with you today.

[02:17] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, wonderful. And I'm so excited to have you here. And I want to welcome back every Bendy Body. Okay, let's jump in. What is an occupational therapist and how does this differ from a physical therapist? And also, why is this so important for people with EDS and HSD?

[02:34] Corinne McLees, OT: This is such a good question, and I have a few different responses. The first is what I will tell you what the difference is not, because I feel like there's an old-school way of looking at the difference of occupational and physical therapy, and then there's a more like holistic approach. So an old-school definition might be like an occupational therapist or an OT looks at your arms and your hands and treats those parts. So we kind of divide the body like top, and then the PT would be the bottom, like the trunk, the legs, the feet. Okay, but that is not at all like what— that's not what we do. That's not our difference. I would say that the major difference between occupational and physical therapy is what we emphasize. So like what the purpose or the goal of therapy might be. While OT and PT might have like the exact same interventions, OTs look at everything through the lens of improving your function so that you can engage in like everyday meaningful activities. So like we're very— our goals are very activity focused. For example, I know you help a lot of dancers. Maybe like a goal might be that so that your dancer or gymnast could weight bear on a bar with 3 out of 10 pain or less, whereas the physical therapist might emphasize more like strength or range of motion goals. And so we might have very similar interventions, as wrist strengthening for this one example, but the OT's focus would be on the outcome of like that occupation or that everyday activity, if that makes sense.

[04:15] Dr. Linda Bluestein: It does, and that's fascinating. I always learn so much when I have these conversations because I've definitely had that old-school impression that occupational therapists dealt with the shoulders, elbows, wrists, hands, and physical therapists didn't, and they dealt with pretty much every other part of the body. So that's really, really fascinating, and thank you for explaining that.

[04:36] Corinne McLees, OT: Of course. And, you know, I think it's easy to make that distinction because when we think about our everyday activities, we do a lot with our hands, a lot of focused things with our hands, such as cooking, or, like, I help a lot of crafters and knitters. And so, like, those are, like, very classic, like, occupational therapy things because we also really focus on activities that provide meaning and bring us joy. I mean, we do the whole spectrum of activities, all the activities that you want and need to do. but occupational therapy does tend to focus more on those fine motor and hand things. So, and also there's a lot of like different opinions and explanations out there. So if you are listening and you're an OT or a PT and you have a different way of explaining it, please message me on Instagram because I always love to hear other perspectives.

[05:29] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And I love to hear that too. So definitely, yeah, send— sending you a message and/or commenting, because we'll be sharing, of course, this episode via some social media posts. And that's also a great place too to have a conversation, and then other people can see as well, like, what people are saying. So that's for sure. So, can you tell us what some common reasons are for hand pain with connective tissue disorders like EDS or other conditions involving joint hypermobility like HSD?

[05:55] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah, yeah, there are so many reasons why people's hands might hurt with connective tissue disorders. And I kind of want to briefly talk about like hand anatomy in general to help this kind of make sense. Because hands are so complex. It's not just one joint, like it's not just a shoulder, or it's not just a hip. It is— there's roughly 29 joints in just one hand alone. And so right, so when we think about how there's a lot of connective tissue that surrounds joints. There's a lot of connective tissue in our hands. In addition to that, like, hypermobility can affect each of these joints separately. So you might like each joint, each of the 29 joints in your hand, like, might not be very well supported. And so this can create like a lot of hypermobile movement patterns within your hands, like as you're engaging in your everyday activities, where you are like hyperextending your finger joints without realizing and you're hyperextending like every single one without realizing it over and over again every day. So creating that picture of like, if you look at your hand and you look at all the creases in your hand and you maybe you bend your fingers and you see like all the different joints that are within your hand and within your wrist that have to work together, hypermobility can affect each of those individually. And then it creates this whole picture of like hypermobile movement patterns that are not supportive. So because of all of this, it can present itself in a lot of different ways. Like, people might have just like general pain and swelling, like their hand just might feel tired all the time because it fatigues faster because their joints are in hyperextended positions all day, which means that the muscles around that are supposed to be powering these movements have to work a lot harder. It could be that you might have like a lot of subluxations, feelings of your finger joints getting stuck in like a hyperextended or backwards position, and that you have to like overcome a sort of like resistance. You might feel like a popping or locking when you go to make a fist or use your hands. And this can often actually mimic trigger finger. I've had several people with hypermobility get diagnosed with trigger finger and then we find that it's simply actually like their ligaments subluxing out of place. And so finding like the appropriate hand supports for that. A nerve impingement is another thing that affects us hypermobile humans a lot more than non-hypermobile humans. And this creates like a numbness and tingling sensation in your hands. But just because you're having these symptoms in your hands, doesn't necessarily mean that the hand alone needs to be treated. so we need to look at all of the possibilities, areas that it could be impinged, starting with our neck. It might be your neck, it might be your shoulder, it could be your elbow, like cubital tunnel syndrome, or your wrist, carpal tunnel syndrome. but nerve impingement is a common one that people complain about, like that sensation in their fingers, that numbness, that falling asleep and that tingling sensation. And then I have one more. arthritis is also like a common thing. There's several studies that have linked the development of hand osteoarthritis, with especially in that of our CMC joint. So like that joint at the very base of our thumb where our thumb meets our wrist. A few studies have linked joint hypermobility or instability with the development of osteoarthritis specifically in that CMC joint. So all of these reasons and probably so many more are like why people with hypermobility tend to have sore or fatigued hands.

[09:54] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's a lot of reasons. And for those that are listening to this episode, Corinne is at times showing us her hands, and I would encourage you to watch the YouTube video if you can. And I encourage you to keep doing that because it is helpful. You and I were both looking at our hands and I was looking at all the creases when you said that. So that's really helpful. And then there's small fiber neuropathy as well that can influence, you know, numbness, tingling in the hands. There's a lot of different things. So if people have hypermobility in their hands or in various different joints in their hands, we're going to talk about, I'm sure, a lot of like getting into real specifics. But can you give us a little bit of a 10,000-foot overview as to what people can do if they have hypermobility in their hands?

[10:38] Corinne McLees, OT: Yes, I love a 10,000-foot overview. So I like to approach it not just with one thing, but with like an umbrella of things. and I take a fourfold approach. So number one would be looking at hand support options. And I say this very broadly cuz it's not just braces or splints, it's like everything from ring splints to kinesio tape to braces. But I kind of categorize all of those as hand supports, being that first dimension of support or of things that people can do for their hypermobile hands. The second one is what I call gadgets, aka assistive devices or tools to make things, your activities, more ergonomic for your hands. For example, this might be an electric can opener. Using a like vertical mouse would be an example of what I would call a gadget, which is just like an ergonomic computer mouse that keeps your wrist in a more neutral position. oh yes, I love that you have one too.

[10:38] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I have one too.

[11:42] Corinne McLees, OT: Oh, that's a good gadget. Yeah, so those would be like that second category of gadgets. the third category that I love to teach on is helping people develop a pain flare toolbox specifically for their hands. So this might be heat if heat feels good, cold, use of TENS, massage, compression gloves, the things that can bring the pain down, especially when we're in a flare. And then finally, like the fourth sort of dimension that I like to look at is exercises, of course, like engagement in therapeutic exercises with your hands when done appropriately and not in a way that like encourages hyperextension or joint strain, but instead keeps all of your joints like reined in and aligned. This can be a very beneficial way to add like a natural support to your joints by strengthening your muscles. So those are my 4 things: hand supports, gadgets, Pain Flare Toolbox, and exercises.

[12:45] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Awesome. I love those 4 things. And I have a lot of hand problems. I've had all kinds of different devices over the years. I use a lot of gadgets. I obviously have this mouse. And I've had some surgeries and so I particularly want to know this, how we can strengthen our hands without making our things worse. I know this is a question that came up a lot from questions from the followers. And I definitely need to know this as well. My orthopedic hand specialist actually told me not to go to therapy and not to do any specific exercises. Maybe he thought I would make things worse, but I would love to know how you work with people to strengthen their hands because hand grip strength is really important, right?

[13:31] Corinne McLees, OT: It is. It is very important. And I'm actually shocked that that's what he told you to do. Or not do.

[13:39] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Right.

[13:39] Corinne McLees, OT: Or not do. Have you had hand therapy before?

[13:42] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I have after—

[13:43] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah.

[13:43] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So I had a submuscular ulnar nerve transposition and I also had a bone grafting surgery in my wrist. And I got CRPS after my bone grafting surgery in my wrist. And I got the impression that maybe he felt like because my pain was well controlled, that he was worried if I started to do more therapy that maybe I would have more pain. But, so I've had lots of— I've worked with OTs a lot, but I haven't done it for years.

[14:12] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah. Oh, well, I'm really— I feel honored to be able to like answer your question about this. And of course, you know, all our listeners' questions as well. so when we're talking about increasing our hand strength, there are so many different hand exercise tools and gadgets out there. Like Amazon has a bajillion that they'll try to sell you on. And I just, you know, as an OT specializing in hands, I just keep coming back to Theraputty. Have you had any experience working with Theraputty before?

[14:46] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I have. Yeah. And are you going to show us some?

[14:50] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah. Yeah. And I was thinking I would try to also describe it for those of us that are listening, but I was going to also show. So I love Theraputty because it's a great way to begin strengthening your hands, especially if you're not used to hand exercises. When you do Theraputty exercises with like the lightest resistance possible, it honestly is like fun. It's like silly putty. It's like a fun fidget almost. but when you begin it with a lower resistance, it's more gentle— it's more gentle on your joints. It's a more gentle way to like introduce this concept of hand strengthening. Theraputty often comes in like 4 or 5 different resistance strengths. You can actually look on Amazon or on Google and find Theraputty, but I would recommend you get one that has like at least 3 or 4, 4 or 5 different like strength or resistances to it so that you can slowly upgrade over time. and the last reason that I want to talk about why I love Theraputty for people with hypermobility is because it offers amazing proprioceptive feedback to your finger joints. And oftentimes people with hypermobility have poor proprioception. If you have poor proprioception in your hands, you might find yourself dropping things a lot or like squeezing your steering wheel really hard, like squeezing things too hard, squeezing your writing utensil too hard, overreaching or underreaching, those are all signs that you have poor proprioception in your hands. Theraputty offers really good feedback to your finger joints, and it helps to improve that connection from your brain all the way down to your hand so that you are more aware of like what your fingers are doing in space. So that's why I love Theraputty for people with hypermobility.

A few— here's just a few exercise ideas that you can do with the Theraputty. You might just have it in your hand. And oftentimes, like, I have very long, big hands, very long fingers, but a lot of— yeah, a lot of people— I do. Yeah, I think that's my connective tissue as well, my connective tissue issue.

[17:04] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Arachnodactyly—

[17:05] Corinne McLees, OT: Yes, absolutely. What a big word for a silly phenomenon. Yes, love it. So I don't have an issue when my Theraputty is like big and like it comes— some of them come in like a lot. Like if it's like a 3-ounce container of putty, that can feel like a lot if you have small hands. So don't be afraid to like cut it in half if you need to, or, you know, use two-thirds of it. but all my long-fingered girlies and boys out there, they can use the whole thing. So just having it in your hand and just slowly squeezing the putty. So we're like driving our fingertips all the way to the middle. You should be able to see like nice indentations in the putty once you've done this, and then do it again. What we're looking for too is that it's— we're not like over-flexing, we're not like over-squeezing, we're not trying to hyperflex so tightly and make such a tight fist, because part of what I like to use exercises for with our hands is practicing a more controlled range of motion. So just kind of squeezing within like what feels like a therapeutic range rather than really hyperflexing at everything. So that is one idea, is just squeezing it. That will increase your grip strength, your ability to grip items easier. Another option would be to roll it into a log, and then—

[18:32] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And as you're doing that, can I ask you a follow-up question?

[18:35] Corinne McLees, OT: Yes, please.

[18:36] Dr. Linda Bluestein: You were showing that, which was really helpful. So you're holding it like in the palm of your hand and then you're squeezing with your fingers. Is your thumb not involved in that?

[18:45] Corinne McLees, OT: That's a great question. I like what works for the listener. I want you to do whatever works and feels natural to you. A lot of people leave their thumbs out of that. I leave my thumb completely out of that one because the one I'm about to show you has like your thumb included, and my thumb likes to just kind of be out of the way for my finger exercises. But you can include it if it feels natural to you.

[19:09] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, great.

[19:10] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah, that's a great question. so we've rolled out our putty into a log, kind of feels like preschool, and then you can pinch it. So I would have it down here on my tabletop surface, but I'm going to hold it up here for those of you watching. But you would just pinch the log, so I'm taking my index finger and my thumb and I'm just pinching it, and then I might take my middle finger and my thumb and pinch it, then my ring finger and thumb and pinch it, then my pinky and thumb and pinch it, and then we would start over again. Pinching, practicing pinching and pinching the log of the Theraputty is a great way to improve your fine motor coordination, which can come into play with things like writing or clasping a bracelet. All those small, all those teeny tiny like finger joints and muscles have to coordinate together very well and have some strength behind them to be able to do our daily activities. So pinching the Theraputty log is one way to increase the strength there. Once you have your log, you can also— like, the Theraputty sticks to itself, so you can make it into a circle, and then you would put that Theraputty circle or ring around your hand, like around your fingers. And you could do this with a rubber band or a hair tie too. Just put like a rubber band over your fingers and then slowly open up your hand. And so that would be strengthening the back of your hand, those extensor muscles. yeah, so I feel like that's sort of a good array of strengthening the different muscles of our hands and in different movement patterns. another thing too is like people that are hypermobile, I tend to really encourage you to go into it low and slow. and so that might mean like, you know, your therapist may prescribe you like 3 sets of 10 repetitions, but when you're starting out, you might just only do 8 of them and see how it goes, and not like overdo it because our joints are so small and our connective tissue and everything in our hands, as hypermobile humans, we're more prone to inflammation. And so just really meeting yourself where you're at with that low level of resistance, and just slowly upgrading over time, is what I would say to do if you're just starting out.

[21:40] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I think that's really smart, and I will definitely be ordering that putty this afternoon. So I love that.

[21:47] Corinne McLees, OT: Yes, keep it at your desk as like a good fidget or a good cue.

[21:51] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, yes, that visual reminder will be great, as well. And so traditional therapies, I think a lot of people probably are going to listen to this and say, you know, they've tried some more traditional things and they haven't worked. What are some reasons why some of those traditional therapies might not have worked for people with hand pain and hypermobility?

[22:12] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah, this is a great question. And I think oftentimes, like, someone comes to a doctor, like a generalist doctor that has hand pain. And I know that you know too that like our medical system, there's just not enough awareness of the signs of hypermobility. I personally feel like there's blatant signs of hypermobility, especially in the hands. Like if you just even were to look at somebody gripping a writing utensil, you know, you could see it there. but it's often missed. and again, you know, we have like 29 different joints in our hands that could be causing pain and soreness. And so I personally feel like the catch-all term for hand pain, like if someone comes to the doctor with hand pain, they're usually diagnosed with tendonitis. And this is so common, I had a hunch that it was so common that I polled my Instagram audience on this, and 88% of question responders reported that they were first diagnosed with tendonitis before they were then realized that they had hypermobility or suspected that they have hypermobility.

[23:20] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wow.

[23:20] Corinne McLees, OT: They were diagnosed with like, yeah, like that. Oftentimes the De Quervain's tendonitis, that thumb tendonitis. And so oftentimes, like, if then someone is diagnosed with tendonitis, then they go into a hand therapy clinic. And so all the clinician sees is, okay, this is tendonitis. So what is our general, like, what is our protocol for tendonitis? We're going to ice the area, you know, for 4 to 6 weeks or whatever, and we're going to have them wear just a brace, a brace that keeps their thumb and their wrist completely from moving. So now the person with hypermobility might be in more pain because they are having to— like, they're in a brace, they don't like ice maybe, and they're having to overcompensate because their thumb and their wrist aren't moving. Their fingers are having to move in different ways and hyperextended ways. And so oftentimes, like, the people that are diagnosed with tendonitis in their hands, they don't get better with that traditional treatment for tendonitis. and so then they're kind of left with those same issues because the root of the issue, which is hypermobility in their hands, was never addressed at all or was never even realized.

[24:33] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure. And they have the wrong working diagnosis.

[24:36] Corinne McLees, OT: Yes, absolutely. 100%. Yeah.

[24:41] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, interesting. What are some helpful low-profile braces and hand support options? And one of the followers asked, is it okay to wear compression gloves long-term?

[24:53] Corinne McLees, OT: Oh, that's a good one. Yes. I love talking about low-profile hand supports. and it's totally okay to wear compression gloves long-term. Just make sure, especially like if you're using them for nighttime use, which is actually a really amazing way to not sleep with your hands all like in this bent-up position. But compression gloves can offer a nice nighttime cue. Just make sure that they're not too tight, especially if you're using them over a long period of time, that they're not leaving— the seams aren't leaving marks on your hands, you know, for hours and hours once you take them off. so compression gloves are one example of a low-profile hand support. some other examples include kinesio tape. I have a really popular kinesio tape tutorial for thumb pain on my Instagram. I've pinned it at the top of my feed, so if you find me, make sure that you check out that tutorial. kinesio tape in the thumb is amazing. It offers fully customizable support, and it can also improve the wearer's proprioception so that when they have the tape on, it's not going to restrict anything. It's like, you look at this kinesio tape and you're like, I don't understand how this is making such a difference for me. but it might be improving your proprioception, your awareness of what your thumb is doing. So then you're doing a lot less strenuous— you're engaging with your activities with your thumbs in a way less strenuous way. and like improving those like almost unconscious movement patterns by just simply having kinesio tape on your thumb. So Kinesio Tape is one example of a low-profile support option that I love. In a similar way, if you Google or look up on Amazon silicone thumb supports, these are— it's kind of like silicone stretchy material that offers like a targeted compression to your thumb and to your wrists. And again, I suspect this definitely helps to improve your proprioception. You can still fully move your thumb, which is really important, but just offers some good pain relief and support to your thumbs. the Push Metagrip. I don't know, Dr. Bluestein, if you've heard of the Push Metagrip, but it's one of my favorite thumb braces.

[27:09] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I have not heard of that one. Okay. And by the way, I will have in the show notes, I will have a link to that pinned video that you have on Instagram.

[27:18] Corinne McLees, OT: Oh, okay. Yay. Awesome. Perfect. So this is the Push Metagrip for those of you watching. For those of you listening, please look it up. It's a very unique thumb brace in that when I say the word thumb brace, you're probably picturing this itchy, bulky, black brace that has a metal bar that runs from the top of your thumb all the way down into your forearm. And when you think about that picture of a thumb brace, you can't really use your hand, like at all. Like you can't. Your thumb is out of the picture, and our thumb gives us almost half of our hand's functionality. Like, we are humans with opposable thumbs, and we need to be able to use them, you know? Right. and so I love like the low-profile options such as the ones that we're talking about because you can still be supported in your everyday activities. And you might, like, you might use a wrist brace or a thumb brace when it's really flared up or when you're sleeping or resting, but having these like more functional thumb hand support options is great. So the Push Metagrip is made by BraceLab, and it's considered a brace. There's actually a metal bar that runs around the thumb. But as you can see, or listeners, if you're looking this up, it leaves my thumb fully mobile. So it really is the way that it's positioned and the way that it works is that it really offers a good squeeze to this bone, right, that the first bone of my thumb that connects my thumb to my wrist. That provides better alignment of my CMC joint, or that joint that, again, where my thumb meets my wrist. And once we have this established, a stable base of support for our thumb, oftentimes, like, it really helps a lot of the pain, especially like my kayakers love this, my sporty people, people who paint or crochet or knit. Like, this is a really— you can cook in this brace. So the Push Metagrip is just a really good one that you can still get really high-quality support. I would say this is more supportive than kinesio tape, but you can still really use your hand. and I also want to show you the Wristable. I don't— it's another—

[29:35] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, before you go on to that, I have to ask, so, because I feel like this question comes up all the time about overusing bracing. Is there a downside? Is there a downside to— because I'm thinking I have bad CMC arthritis bilateral. You can see I have like no thenar eminence. I'm showing Corinne my hands right now. My hands are really bad. But anyway, is there a downside to wearing that on a really regular basis?

[30:03] Corinne McLees, OT: Such a good question. So I will say that there is a downside to wearing your traditional run-of-the-mill brace that has a metal bar in it all the time because that will weaken our muscles and the muscles in our wrist and in our hand. But the Push Metagrip is designed in a way that it actually, you can see your muscles of your thenar eminence are actually contracting better with this thing on because it's more aligned. And so like with these types of supports, I don't personally feel like you can really overdo it, especially when you're using it in an intentional way for certain pain levels or certain activities. But I have had people start wearing the Push Metagrip that end up almost more fatigued in that thenar area because those muscles are being recruited because they're not normally recruited. But this Push Metagrip brace actually helps to like recruit all of the right muscles around your thumb. So you should definitely look into it.

[31:04] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I definitely will. I've got my little shopping list. We'll have links for all of this. So that everyone can find all of these things that you're mentioning. So thank you so much. This is great.

[31:13] Corinne McLees, OT: Okay, of course.

[31:14] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Now I'm ready for the next one. I just had to ask that.

[31:17] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah, no, that's such a good question. I know you— I think that you help a lot of gymnasts and dancers, is that right? Okay, so this is called the Wristable. if you— it's Brace Lab makes the Wristable. but I might just show you a picture because it can be quite annoying to get on, but if you are watching the video or if you're looking this up, it really helps people to weight bear better. But the targeted support that it has for your wrist, it doesn't block any functional motion. So BraceLab actually tested the Wristable— that's W-R-I-S-T-A-B-L-E— they tested this wrist support out on gymnasts to see if they could still do all of the things that they needed to do. And they did. Like, they didn't have any complaints about it, but they were just a lot more supported, especially in that weight-bearing position. And they were still allowed functional— full functional range of motion, just better wrist stability. And this is a relatively new brace that BraceLab just came out with, which is really cool.

[32:28] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's fantastic. I've never heard of that one.

[32:31] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah, it's a good one.

[32:33] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So what particular things should people be looking for with compression gloves? Because I know there's so many different options. There's— they have full fingers, fingerless, copper-infused, whatever. So what should people look for?

[32:43] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah, this is a great question. So I would encourage you, if you're looking for compression gloves, to think about what you need to use them for. For example, when I drive, I like to wear compression gloves, and I actually like to get the ones that have the grip in the palm so that when I grip my steering wheel, my hands aren't sliding off of it, but I have a good grip on them. but the texture of these gloves— like, you want to consider the texture and the fabric too. I would never wear these gloves to sleep in because I really don't like the texture. So for sleeping, you would want to look for something softer, something with 100% cotton that feels good on your hand. if you're trying to consider whether you want the full finger or the open fingertip gloves. You probably don't want the full finger for daytime use, but that can be a great way to— a great thing to have for nighttime use if you like the idea of your fingers enclosed. Some people really don't at all. I would say the open fingertip ones are more popular. And then you— it's funny that you mentioned that thing about copper because there aren't— there's like no scientific evidence to support that copper or some are infused with magnets. I've seen magnets in compression gloves near the wrist and the thumb. There's no scientific evidence that supports that this helps, but some people swear by it. And so like, if you think that that would work for you, or if you've had a good experience with copper or magnets in the past, then you might want to look for compression gloves that have those things in them.

[34:10] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, that makes sense. And I want to move on to ring splints. I noticed that you're wearing a number of ring splints yourself.

[34:18] Corinne McLees, OT: Yes. Yay.

[34:19] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And I actually was prescribed a ring splint for this finger, my index finger on my right hand, and I wish I had worn it more. As you can see, it's now pretty arthritic. I don't know if the ring splint would have helped that or not. But anyway, so I would love to know your thoughts on ring splints, and also if you have any thoughts on getting them covered by insurance. One person did ask that question specifically.

[34:41] Corinne McLees, OT: It's a good question. Yeah, so I, like, I'm a fan of ring splints if they work for you. If like, if you, if you're not someone that's averse to like the feeling of metal, or if you don't have a metal allergy, and you feel like you could benefit from them, like, I absolutely love that for you. In my opinion, especially with this population, this hypermobile population, I don't really feel like we can overwear our ring splints too much because most designs of ring splints, I mean, I can't say this for all because there's so many different makers out there, but most designs, like most traditional ring splint designs, do not prevent any sort of functional range of motion. Like, you can still open and close your hand and move your hand and move your fingers. You can wear them for any activity that you could possibly think of. but the ring splint itself is preventing that hyperextension or that subluxation. It's bringing your joints into better alignment, into more stability. They're basically doing what your connective tissue is failing to do in all of those joints of your hand. So I love ring splints. There's also, I feel, a time each day where they all have to come off because my sensations are like overwhelmed. I'm like, get all of these off my hand right now. I never would recommend sleeping in them or using them for like heavy sports or something, like if you wouldn't wear jewelry to the thing that you're doing, then ring splints are not, you know, meant to be there. as well, you mentioned the question about insurance coverage. Are you— you're in the US, right? Yes. Yes. Okay. So in the US, pretty much the only way that I know that you might be able to get them covered by insurance is through Silver Ring Splints. So Silver Ring Splints is a US-based carrier of ring splints. I don't know, is that the kind that you got?

[36:39] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I did, and it actually was covered by my insurance, so I was very fortunate.

[36:43] Corinne McLees, OT: Oh, that's amazing, because it really depends on your insurance plan. It depends honestly on sometimes how the therapist bills for it, or is able to bill for it. Like, I think the therapist, they have— they definitely have to be like, have a measuring kit for silver ring splints. but more than that I think they have to be a DME provider in the US. And so like the place that I worked at last, like I couldn't bill L codes to insurances, which would be the code for the ring splints. So even though we would measure them and order them for our patients, like I never was able to have my clients get their ring splints covered. But if you're wondering, you can always call your insurance company and see. and if they're not covered by insurance, there's a lot of makers on Etsy that make ring splints that make it— they make it a little bit cheaper, I would say, than silver ring splints. And they make it very clear on their checkout pages on how exactly to measure yourself.

[37:48] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

[37:49] Corinne McLees, OT: And a lot of them, like Eva Bell Jewelry in particular, has a really good policy on returns or exchanges. Like if you get your ring splints that you've measured for yourself and they're just not fitting right, I think there's like a 30-day policy where you can send them back and have them resized for free.

[38:07] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, yeah, that's great, that's great. And then what about plastic ring splints? Because people make those as well, right?

[38:14] Corinne McLees, OT: Yes, Oval-8 ring splints or Oval-8 splints, they're like the beige, like beigey pink plastic ring splints that you can find on Amazon. those are probably at your local hand therapy place too, but those are a great, I would say, way to like try out ring splints. if you really are curious if ring splints would be right for you or if they would feel right for you, instead of, you know, spending over $100 like on a ring splint, you could get a pack of Oval-8 plastic splints for like, I don't know, you could probably get 3 for like $20 that sort of have different sizes that you could try out. and then it's also great for people with like metal allergies or just like irritation from metal. but yeah, those are good. They tend to slip off a lot more. Like I have a lot of my people lose these, but you know, not really lose their metal ring splints.

[39:09] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure. That's really, really good to know. And what about, I imagine you work with people who are, you know, children that are in school and needing to write and use their hands to hold books and things like that. And you probably have worked with elderly people and everything in between. So in terms of hand exercises for people that are hypermobile, how does your advice differ based on people's age?

[39:37] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah, that's a really good question. And I would say, I would say honestly, like what we talked about with the Theraputty in particular is if you're— if no matter what age you are, if you're starting low and slow. I mean, I actually don't work with too many children, so I would say if, you know, if you're trying to get your child to engage in their hand muscles, they would probably love to play with their putty. It would probably be less repetitions and exact technique and more like, you know, put some fun like beads in the putty and then try to have them take it out and make it a game. so aside from like making it more playful for children I would say no matter what age you are, as long as you're like really slowing down the exercises and making sure that you're not straining or hyperextending or like popping or subluxing your finger joints as you do them, and you're not like powering through the exercises, then like generally it's— I usually recommend, you know, starting with maybe just 8 to 10 repetitions and trying to work your way up to those, like, that ideal 2 to 3 sets of 8 to 12 reps, where once you've done that, your hand might feel fatigued, but it's not so fatigued or sore that you're unable to, you know, use your hand for the rest of the day. But you know, older adults really, they have a really good experience with Theraputty too, especially because it offers like that wide, wide range of different resistances.

[41:05] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, and what are some things that people should avoid doing?

[41:09] Corinne McLees, OT: That's a great question. So I, you know, oftentimes I feel like we are using, we have a lifelong lifetime of using our bodies and our hands in ways that feel normal to us, but that don't really serve us or serve our joints. And so I feel like most of the work is bringing way more awareness into maybe the less than ideal ways that you're using your hands throughout the day and trying to shift that. So like, I typically recommend like, try not to— like, try to avoid hyperextended finger or thumb or wrist positions as much as you can. And this, this, you know, you might not think that you're like regularly hyperextending your hand joints or your finger joints or your thumb joints, but if you are hypermobile, I can guarantee you probably are. And so you might need to like really start slowing down during your day, especially when you like do something with your hand, like when you lock or unlock your door. Or maybe you can look at how you're gripping your writing utensil or how you're carrying a heavy tray in the kitchen. Just like slow down and like look at your hands more and like pay attention to your hands. Maybe you set like a reminder on your phone, you know, twice a day that's like, hey, like what are my hands doing right now? And just start to like cultivate this awareness of what your fingers are doing so that you're not— you can begin to shift how you're using your hands and that so that they're not in this unergonomic, super strained position over and over again each day. We use our hands so much, it's often unconscious. And so really a lot of the work is like bringing more awareness to how you're using your hands to help you. If you are— if you feel like this might be you, but you're like, I have— I'm having a hard time understanding where I would even start with this or having accountability with this, you should check out my free masterclass, which I believe will be in the link of the show below. And so it's a free, you know, hour, hour and a half long masterclass that you can attend. And it— you'll really just— I've got really clear pictures and you'll have a better understanding of what activities you might be straining your fingers in and how to like shift out of that.

[43:28] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's great. Yeah, I look forward to sharing that with people. And I think that there's no such thing as paying attention to your hands too soon.

[43:37] Corinne McLees, OT: Exactly. 100%. Right. A lot of the work is preventative. Yeah.

[43:42] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So so important for us.

[43:44] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah.

[43:46] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. What about tips for traveling? So if we're traveling, especially if we're traveling by ourselves, you know, and I feel like this is really challenging and you have hand problems. What are some tips that you have for people for that?

[44:00] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah, are you picturing like an airport situation?

[44:03] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, you know, picking up luggage and, yes, you know, all of the things that you have to do.

[44:09] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah, absolutely. Definitely like wear your hand supports. Like don't just pack them in your suitcase, but actually like have them on. Especially like important for your thumb and/or your wrist if you have like discomfort there and you're having a hard time managing your luggage, wearing a good hand support in the airport is a great way to navigate this. also I would avoid, like, I would look for the luggage that has the 4 wheels on it that you can like very easily push instead of like the clunky kind that you have that has the 2 wheels that kind of like is always getting unbalanced. so make sure you have like good luggage that you can roll. and I mean, traveling, traveling alone is incredibly difficult. I would always say to not be afraid to ask for help when you need it. Like if you need help loading your carry-on bag up into the topmost part, like just, just ask for help. especially if you know that it's going to cause a flare.

[45:16] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So I got one of those spinner suitcases and my son, he kept saying, Mom, you have to get a spinner suitcase. You just have to.

[45:24] Corinne McLees, OT: Is that what they're called?

[45:25] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes. Yes. And all 4 wheels spin in every direction. They're amazing. They're amazing. And I got mine at Costco, which is one of my absolute favorite stores. And it was life-changing because I do travel a lot by myself. And it really makes a huge difference because I can have it next to me. So it's a lot easier on my shoulder. It's easier on my elbow, my wrist, my entire upper extremity. I have it next to me and it's literally completely effortless. And I can do it with my non-dominant hand. Whereas if I'm pulling something behind me, that strains my shoulder, my elbow, my wrist. So yeah, I'm glad that you mentioned the spinner suitcase because I didn't even think about that before, but I think that is a really good one.

[46:08] Corinne McLees, OT: I'm so glad. I don't travel that much, so I didn't know the name for it. I was like the luggage for four-wheeled kind, but a spinner suitcase. That's amazing. Okay.

[46:15] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, yeah, I love that. Awesome. Okay, and you also had a post recently where you said our current medical system isn't set up for people in chronic pain, which I totally agree, by the way. can you elaborate what you were thinking with that, and in particular, what people can do if they feel like things are not working for them, if they can really relate to that comment?

[46:38] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah, yeah, that's— I'm glad that we're on the same page about that. I know you are too. I mean, I think there's multiple reasons like why it's not set up for people in chronic pain. one is that like we've talked about, there's just simply not enough awareness of medical professionals, like of the complexities of hypermobility like in our current medical system. So like they're like what I think you call it a working diagnosis is different than what is actually at the root of the issues.

[47:05] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh yes, a working diagnosis.

[47:07] Corinne McLees, OT: Yes. Okay. Yes. Working, not a walking diagnosis, a working diagnosis. Oh my God. This is why you're the doctor. Okay. Oh, I love it.

[47:17] Dr. Linda Bluestein: At first I was like, wait, a what? Yes. Working diagnosis.

[47:20] Corinne McLees, OT: Yes. Oh, thank you. Yeah. And so that would be like, that would be, I would say one reason. I mean, as a therapist, another reason would be just the way that our insurances are set up. They do not want to reimburse for chronic conditions. They want to see, especially like in therapy, they want to unfortunately see people get better within a really predictable, what they would call reasonable amount of time, which it's like, that's not even, they can't determine that for us. Right. And so they might stop reimbursing or not approve any more visits for therapy. And so then people feel like they're left in the dark. And so I think if you're here, then you know that there is like an amazing like online presence of wonderful educators that are trying to just help you online. And so like, you kind of have to be your own advocate and do like, do a lot of the own, your own work. And, you know, things like coaching programs or you know, things that are outside of like the traditional medical system that's not necessarily insurance reimbursable. Those are things that I feel typically can help us more than maybe like that structured, like you get 8 visits for the year and then you're done. And so it really is like more of a long game than that.

[48:49] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, I totally agree. And the insurance situation is so incredibly frustrating. Because you're right, they expect you to— you have to get enough better, but in some ways not too much better, right? It's like, it's like this silly— it's, it's ridiculous. It's such a— yeah, it's such a huge problem. They have way too much control.

[49:10] Corinne McLees, OT: They do. I know, I absolutely— it's icky writing my notes for people, you know, for insurances. It's like you said, it's like, oh, they're improving in this way. But they're not improving in this way, but they're still improving enough to get therapy. It's like, you know, it's like mind games. Yeah, why can't we just— yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.

[49:30] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So people end up working basically for the insurance company and not for the patient and not doing what's right for the patient because, yeah, it's a huge problem. Okay, so I want to move on to the questions from followers and people who submitted these questions on the broadcast channel. So I was really excited that we got so many questions.

[49:48] Corinne McLees, OT: Yay.

[49:48] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And some of these we might have already covered a little bit, but I think it doesn't hurt to go into them again because they're really important. So the first question is, why does it hurt to write?

[50:00] Corinne McLees, OT: That's a good question. Like, why does it hurt? Or like how to sort of also address the hand pain if it is hurting?

[50:07] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So I think maybe what the person was thinking, at least if I try to read into their mind, is, you know, why do so many people get hand pain with writing?

[50:14] Corinne McLees, OT: With handwriting. Yeah, yeah. So, like, I think we've talked about this before, but most of us hypermobile people are characterized by like a classic sort of hyperextended death grip where our topmost finger joints— I don't know how you are writing. I love that pen.

[50:34] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I'm showing a pen. I don't even know what this is called, but I'll put the pen again. Yeah, is that what it is?

[50:39] Corinne McLees, OT: Well, yeah, I think that's one of the— that's like the generic term for it. Yes, the pen again. It's like a Y pen. Yeah, a Y pen. Yeah, a Y pen. Yep. We're often characterized by this like hyperextended grip. And when our fingertip joints are hyperextending on our writing utensil, we actually lose a lot of force on our writing utensil itself. So we have to push almost harder, like our muscles and our joints have to work a lot harder to write when most, most of our force is actually going to hyperextend our fingertip joints. And so that's when we see a lot of like hand fatigue. I think another reason, another common reason for pain with handwriting is that maybe we're only using our hand and the rest of our, like the rest of our arm is like glued to our side and we're like just using our fingers. And instead we can maybe like try to loosen everything up a little bit in our shoulder and in our elbow. And kind of make it more of like a flowy fluid movement. Another common reason I see for hand pain, especially like if you're getting pain or fatigue in the pinky side of your hand, like the meat of your palm and that pinky part of your hand, at least what I've noticed for me and for my clients is that oftentimes when we write, our pinky is actually almost forced in like a super hyperflexed, almost bent like in half posture. and so that can be a reason too why handwriting is so strenuous on this side of our hand. but there's a lot of things that we can do about it, and I'd be happy to get into it if you would like. Okay.

[52:20] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And that's the follow-up question. How can people avoid aggravating their thumbs and causing hand pain while either holding a book to read or writing?

[52:29] Corinne McLees, OT: Oh, okay. Awesome. I would love to maybe address writing first since that's on my mind, and then we can definitely talk about books too. so like for hand pain in general with writing. You showed us the Y Pen, which is amazing because it changes the way that you grip the writing utensil entirely. If you don't have a Y Pen, you could try out this concept by just switching where the eraser is. So you would put it in between your index and middle finger. So if you're listening, please watch— come back and watch this. It's a very simple shift that you can make where it's almost like your index and middle finger are surrounding the writing utensil, and it forces a more like bent forward posture of your fingertip joints, and it puts your thumb in a better position too. It can take a lot of practice to make this feel natural and easy, but it's worth it, especially if you have to write a lot. So just changing the way that you are writing. Another way that you can sort of modify your writing utensil— I don't think I have any with me right now, but have you seen the foam tubing stuff, like that cushiony stuff? Oh yes, you have one! Amazing.

[53:50] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I should have had all of these out and ready to go before we started. But as you were saying that, I was like, wait, maybe I have one in my drawer.

[53:57] Corinne McLees, OT: Yes, that's amazing.

[53:59] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, and I have these hand-friendly scissors.

[54:02] Corinne McLees, OT: Yes, the spring-loaded scissors, so good.

[54:05] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I love these things. Anyway, sorry, I didn't mean to digress.

[54:08] Corinne McLees, OT: Good gadgets. Yeah, yeah, I love that. Yeah, so just looking for a writing utensil that's that's either already wider— so the— there's a pen called the Big Fat Arthritis Pen. It's chunky, like it is a nice fat pen. Or modifying your current writing utensil like you've done, Dr. Bluestein, with the foam tubing that you could find like at Lowe's or on Amazon if you just type in foam tubing. Yeah, there's lots of different grip options, but just trying to modify like the writing utensil itself. And then of course, like wearing ring splints, especially where you are hyperextending is another really great way to just more balance that force on your writing utensil so that you're not having to death grip it so much.

[54:55] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, no, that makes sense.

[54:58] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah. It, so, and books too, right? Was the other question about books?

[55:03] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes.

[55:03] Corinne McLees, OT: Yes. Okay. So, you could wear a thumb support while you are reading, whether it's the, you know, the Push Metagrip like we talked about, or your favorite kinesio tape tutorial or a thumb brace. You can also try a book stand. You know, they make book stands that prop up, that hold the pages for you. There's also this thing called a book page holder. I don't know if you've ever seen this, Dr. Bluestein, but it's like it's almost like a ring that you would put on your thumb, but then it has wings on the sides of it so that when you are holding the book, it kind of disperses the force of your thumb onto the pages more broadly. But it's called a book page holder. So if you want to try that as like a ring while you read, that would be another way to reduce some pain.

[55:57] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. I love all of those. And is there anything differently that you would do for or suggest for someone whose issue is more cramping in their hands?

[56:08] Corinne McLees, OT: Hmm. Yeah, I think, I feel like with like cramping or maybe fatigue, I think those things that we talked about and like really focusing on the ergonomics of how you're holding your utensil, how you're using, trying to engage more of your whole arm rather than just your fingers. I think cramping is common when we are having such a tight grip on our writing utensil. So if we can widen the writing utensil, wear some ring splints, and maybe even change like how we're gripping it entirely with with that grip that I showed you, or by using that Y-pen. those are all things that could help with that too.

[56:49] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure. And maybe taking breaks if you can.

[56:51] Corinne McLees, OT: Absolutely.

[56:52] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

[56:52] Corinne McLees, OT: Yep.

[56:53] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. And someone asked about clay therapy, and I'm not sure if that's different from putty therapy, but they asked how effective is clay therapy.

[57:00] Corinne McLees, OT: I think that they're referring to the Theraputty.

[57:04] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

[57:04] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah. So I would say it's as effective. it can be effective, especially when you're using it in the ways that we've talked about. a lot of people with hypermobility who don't have like a hand therapist that maybe specializes in hypermobility, they're just given like, you know, a thick wad of clay or putty and told to squeeze it. And they don't really know like if they're overdoing it or how to squeeze it or how to not over-squeeze it or use it in a therapeutic way. And so if you've ever used Theraputty or clay and it hasn't helped your hand, I feel like if you try the tips that we've talked about, then you might have better results.

[57:47] Dr. Linda Bluestein: All right, and what about people who have hands that go to sleep— go numb in their sleep, excuse me. Do you have thoughts about sleeping positions and/or people who have problems with numbness developing while they're sleeping?

[58:02] Corinne McLees, OT: Yes, that's, I would say, pretty common in people with hypermobility, especially when we're sleeping. So I would first want you to determine if your numbness is on one side of your hand or another side, or if it's like all throughout your hand and your fingertips. If it's on like the pinky side of your hand and into the ring finger, then you very likely have cubital tunnel syndrome. A lot of us sleep in our elbows in a bent up position, but our ulnar nerve is the nerve that runs kind of through our funny bone. And like when you think about how it feels when you hit your funny bone, that sensation that goes through your hand, especially that pinky side of your hand, cubital tunnel syndrome is like that, but it like doesn't go away. and so if you're sleeping and you're noticing that numbness and tingling in your pinky and your ring finger, I would really encourage you to try to sleep in a more elbow-extended posture, which it can be really hard without like an external support there to help you with that because the natural position for sleeping is in like that flexed posture. But you could try like a soft elbow brace that keeps your elbows in a relatively more extended position. you could also, if you don't want to buy a new brace and you want to try out just wrapping a towel, folding up a towel and wrapping a towel around your elbow, and then maybe, you know, putting duct tape around it or some sort of tie to try to keep your elbows more straight at night. Those would be some things that I would recommend that you do. If your numbness and tingling is more on the other side of your hand, so if it's in your thumb, index, middle finger, then we would be looking more at carpal tunnel syndrome, probably. Again, I don't— this is all just educational purposes, right? Obviously, for sure, seek medical care. But if you're having that distribution more on that side of your hand where it's your thumb, index, and middle finger, then wearing a wrist brace at night— and this would be like the time where I would say buy the metal bar wrist brace, like buy a wrist brace that really supports that wrist and keeps it neutral, that doesn't allow you to bend your wrist. Because when we sleep with bent wrists, that puts a lot of compression over our carpal tunnel. And so if you're having— if you wake up and you feel like your hand's falling asleep and you need to shake it out, and if it's mostly on that you know, that one side of your hand, it's probably carpal tunnel syndrome. And finding a good wrist brace and sleeping in it every single night would be definitely incredibly helpful.

[1:00:41] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. Those are super great tips. Awesome. Okay. what about, we've talked about this a little bit, I think, but do you have anything else to add about thumbs that go out of socket?

[1:00:56] Corinne McLees, OT: Hmm. Yeah. I mean, so actually this is perfect timing because I just got my thumb ring splint in the mail today. but it literally, yeah, it literally like I was trying to pop my thumb out of socket because as a nervous tic growing up, I would pop my thumbs out of socket intentionally. And wearing wearing a support such as this, a ring splint or the Push Metagrip, something that's rigid that will help hold it in place can be really helpful. There are also a number of like exercises like targeted exercises for specifically the muscles surrounding your CMC joint that could help as well. So if you ask your therapist for CMC exercises, or maybe you look them up, I think I have a number of them on my Instagram feed too. Building the muscles around your thumb so that there's more natural joint support could be helpful too.

[1:02:03] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, and we had some very specific questions about some specific conditions. So yeah, whatever you can offer. I think I might start with the one about, is there a link between carpal tunnel and joint hypermobility?

[1:02:15] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah, that's a good question. So I don't know like any statistics on it, but I can tell you that I believe that there is definitely a greater incidence of people with carpal tunnel syndrome when they have hypermobility. because probably of a number of things, because of our sleeping position, because our wrists can hyperflex a lot more than the average population, and maybe because of like some surrounding inflammation. So I have definitely seen that more in the hypermobile population.

[1:02:48] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, and we just talked about cubital tunnel a little bit, and you mentioned about wrapping the towel or getting a soft elbow support. Is there anything else that people can do if they have cubital tunnel?

[1:03:01] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah, great question. Aside from sleeping with straight elbows, try to avoid leaning on your elbows. So if you're like someone that sits at your desk and you like to lean on your elbow, that pressure over that like funny bone area is what is causing those symptoms. And so avoiding any sort of like prolonged elbows flexed position or avoiding leaning on your elbows. Watch armrests and tables too. So become more mindful of that. Ulnar nerve glides. So gliding, engaging in exercises that glide that nerve through the cubital tunnel is a great way to also decrease symptoms. And then they make elbow pads that protect your elbow. So like if you are an elbow leaner and you're like having a hard time quitting that, you could put on a heel bow elbow pad.

[1:03:57] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh my gosh, I love that heel bow. Okay, I'm gonna have to look up all these links. I'll find them.

[1:04:02] Corinne McLees, OT: I'm sorry.

[1:04:03] Dr. Linda Bluestein: No, no, no, this is great. This is great. I love being able to offer, you know, all— it's great that you're sharing so many really super specific things for people. They're gonna love this. So, oh yeah, so that's really great. Okay, heel bow. Got it. When you talked about leaning on the elbow. And then I saw what you mean about like actually having the elbow like on a table or something. Oftentimes if I'm giving a talk in a dance studio, all the kids are sitting on the floor and I'll see people leaning back on their elbows and their elbows will be so incredibly hyperextended. And I just like, you know, it's cringy. And of course I have to call them out on it.

[1:04:38] Corinne McLees, OT: Yes, you do. But because it's like that lack of trunk support, you know, that we rely on our extremities to prop us up.

[1:04:47] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Exactly. And even if it doesn't hurt now, it just makes me think, oh, what's that going to feel like later? So, okay, we talked about De Quervain's very briefly, but could you tell us again, what is De Quervain's and is it more common in people with joint hypermobility? And then lastly, what can people do if they have recurrent De Quervain's?

[1:05:08] Corinne McLees, OT: Such a good question. So this was like, De Quervain's tendonitis is also commonly called mommy thumb because a lot of new moms are diagnosed with thumb tendonitis. Tendinitis. We have like quite the intersection of like tendons and nerves that run in— it's called the anatomical snuff box. But when you lift your thumb up and you see that little hole right there, like when you're lifting that thumb up and you see that, it's literally a snuff box. That is the space that is inflamed or has tendinitis with De Quervain's tendinitis. This is a lot more common in people with hypermobility, and, you know, a lot of the traditional treatments for it don't necessarily work too well when we're looking at an entire hypermobile hand and wrist complex. A lot of the traditional treatments for tendinitis in the thumb area include wearing like a metal bar thumb brace or a customized— a custom-made thumb brace that completely shuts down your thumb and your wrist for like 6 weeks or so. And so that's like, I guess, the typical intervention. But when it when it's recurrent and chronic and it keeps coming back, what's going to be more helpful to you is doing all the other stuff that we've talked about today, right? Like our low-profile thumb support options, especially making sure that like your thumb is in an aligned place where it's not like popping out of socket a lot, and that you know, you're using kinesio tape or silicone thumb supports or the Push Metagrip, like nice low-profile ways to support your thumb, especially through like harder or heavier tasks. Another big thing with this tendonitis in particular is it's called mommy thumb because of how we have to lift up our children, right? Like we scoop them up under their armpits with our thumbs, with all of the pressure on our thumb joints of their entire weight. And so if you have a kid, try and pick them up differently, like with maybe like more of like your elbow and shoulder joints. Or if you have to pick them up in that way, really shift out of it quickly and prop them with like your hip and your elbow. So trying to like not really engage in that like lifting position with a lot of strain placed on your thumbs.

[1:07:37] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So another question that somebody asked was about torn triangular fibrocartilage complex, or TFCC, and they wanted to know what can you do if you have a torn TFCC?

[1:07:52] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah, I— this is very common. I would say, I don't know the stats, but subjectively I see torn TFCCs a lot in hypermobile people. the TFCC is a piece of connective tissue or a group of connective tissues that help to stabilize especially this ulnar side of our wrist or like the pinky side of our wrist. and so if it's torn, I mean, oftentimes people jump to surgery, but it's helpful to try more conservative measures first to see if they help, because recurrence rate is, I would say, not fairly common, but it can happen even after you've had the surgery, especially if this is more of like a chronic tear. And I feel like a lot of us have sort of like a chronic TFCC issue. so I would say the first thing you could do is work on like wrist stability exercises, maybe like some wrist isometrics. Are you familiar? I don't know if you've ever seen this before, but there's this like kids game called the True Balance game. It's like a gravity puzzle. No, but like the True Balance game is like, and it's for kids, but I give it to my people with persistent wrist pain and TFCC tears a lot of the time because it acts as like a way to stabilize your wrist and to practice that stability and engage the muscles surrounding it. So exercises would definitely be one thing. The other thing, there's a very specific wrist support that was actually invented by an occupational therapist, I think a certified hand therapist, called the WristWidget. And I know— do you have one? Yes, I do. Yes, that's amazing.

[1:09:43] Dr. Linda Bluestein: This is what it looks like.

[1:09:45] Corinne McLees, OT: So do you have like TFCC tear, or I don't— how did you— okay, I don't.

[1:09:51] Dr. Linda Bluestein: We just connected on probably on Instagram, actually. Oh nice. Yeah, let's see. I'm trying to remember how this goes on. But, but anyway, it has these Velcro straps and it, and the hole goes in here, right?

[1:10:06] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah, it kind of hugs that that ulnar head, that bone on the back of your hand towards the pinky side of your wrist. Yes.

[1:10:16] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And then the Velcro would go down like that.

[1:10:18] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah. So so that provides like very targeted support.

[1:10:22] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Feels good for it.

[1:10:24] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah. Maybe I should leave that on.

[1:10:26] Dr. Linda Bluestein: It feels really good.

[1:10:26] Corinne McLees, OT: It does feel good, right? It's like it's kind of similar concept as the the Wristable almost, that BraceLab wrist support where it's squeezing you in a very like specific way, like right, right here around, and then on the bottom. Yeah, there's a picture too. I will say, like, I feel like people— it works either it heals it, like it works really well for them and they never like have issues again, or it doesn't really like work for their specific situation because everybody's different, right? But there's no way to know until you try, right? And I love, I love the design of it. It's absolutely genius.

[1:11:06] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And I love these conservative things that people can try because you can't undo surgery, and surgery has potential complications. And of course, as you pointed out, there are failures and things like that. And if it's a chronic problem, that's very different than going into a surgery for something that was a more sudden or you know, more acute injury kind of a thing. And so I think it's really important to be considering what is the likelihood of a really successful outcome from any given surgery because it's a big deal.

[1:11:37] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah, I absolutely agree. Yeah, I'm so glad that we're on the same page about that.

[1:11:41] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, awesome. The last specific question on a condition was about trigger finger. Can you explain what trigger finger is? And then the question was, how effective are steroid injections for trigger finger? And of course, this is in the context of you know, EDS or HSD?

[1:12:02] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah. Yeah. So trigger finger is we have a lot of like connective tissue in our hands as we've talked about. And sometimes when there's a lot of inflammation or we're doing a lot of like the same task over and over again, like a lot of heavy gripping maybe for work or something else, we can get almost like a palpable, like a knot of fascia right where our tendon— so we have a bunch of tendons that go through our hand and up to our fingertips, and each tendon has to be able to move and glide smoothly to allow our hand to open and close. So when we have this knot of tissue surrounding one of those tendons, if you can picture like a thread that has kind of frayed a lot and you're trying to get it through the eye of a needle. That's sort of what is happening. Like the eye, it's just like, it's just going to catch. And so what happens is when we make a fist, the tendon will go through it, but then as we try to open it, it will lock and catch because of that accumulation of tissue surrounding that tendon. And then you might have to, you might just, you might be able to pop it back up on your own. Like once it's locked down, like you might be able to straighten your finger up and it's like, oh, that was weird. I don't know why my finger just popped like that. But you might not be able to do that. You might have to physically lift up your finger to get it through. And so especially when it's like a chronic condition, this can become rather painful. The question was about like a steroid injection. So they would put like a steroid injection into the area that has all of that tissue sort of knotted up around that tendon. And I want— don't take my word for this, I've done a lot of research on trigger finger, but I want to say that in the general population, when combined with like splinting for 4 to 6 weeks, so they would— you would splint your finger, you would get a trigger finger splint that keeps whatever finger it is. We'll use my middle finger as an example, but it would keep it keep just that first MCP joint from bending, but the rest of your finger can still bend. So it's still a fairly functional hand. But when, when the corticosteroid injection is combined with a splint worn for 4 to 6 weeks, and especially like more acute cases, I want to say that it's over like a 50% rate that where they would get better. Now in the hypermobile population, of course, that's that's probably a different story, and I don't really have any stats on that because we need a lot more research.

[1:12:02] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I don't have any stats on that.

[1:14:53] Corinne McLees, OT: We probably don't have any stats. Yeah, I should go make some, go conduct a research study. But I also want to say too, like, I think a lot of people with hypermobility think that they have trigger finger, or they might even get diagnosed with trigger finger by just a generalist, you know, primary care physician that just looks at their hand and they're like, oh, that popped, it's trigger finger, when in reality it is more like of a subluxation where we have hyperextended at one of our joints and then we have to almost overcome that, those ligaments going out of place and it pops on the way back down. So I would, you know, I really want to make sure that if you think you have trigger finger that you have like the correct diagnosis because traditional treatments for trigger finger, if you don't, if it's instead of subluxation, they're not going to work.

[1:15:43] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And so if I understand you correctly, trigger finger normally pops when you straighten your finger, and and otherwise if it pops when you're bending your finger, it could be because you overextended and then you go to flex it. So maybe they pop at different times.

[1:16:00] Corinne McLees, OT: That's a really good, like, distinction to make. Yeah, I like that as like a broad distinction.

[1:16:06] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And and as a corollary to this, and I know that this is a much more niche question. So some people might say, oh, you know, but I'm curious to ask if for rock climbers, it's my understanding that they can get a lot of pulley type injuries in their fingers. Do you think that that kind of brace that you've talked about for trigger finger, if you had a pulley injury, that you could wear one of those while your injury is healing maybe, and maybe that would accelerate the healing process?

[1:16:34] Corinne McLees, OT: Oh yeah, I think that's a great idea. Yeah, I think that's definitely worth a shot.

[1:16:41] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Do you know what those braces are called for trigger finger?

[1:16:44] Corinne McLees, OT: If you just look up trigger finger splint, I think the Amazon brand is Vive, V-I-V-E, has a trigger finger splint, but a lot of them are just black and they just kind of go into the palm and then come up and just kind of block that MCP flexion at the finger. But you still again have mostly a functional hand.

[1:17:06] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, great. And did we miss any questions or did you have any final thoughts, any burning things that you just were like dying to get out there? And then after that, we're going to get into the hypermobility hack and where people can find you.

[1:17:19] Corinne McLees, OT: Awesome. Yeah.

[1:17:20] Dr. Linda Bluestein: But I wanted to first see if— you've shared so much wonderful information. This has been so fantastic.

[1:17:26] Corinne McLees, OT: Thank you.

[1:17:26] Dr. Linda Bluestein: But was there anything else that I didn't ask you that you wanted me to ask?

[1:17:30] Corinne McLees, OT: No, I don't think so. I think we've covered so much today.

[1:17:35] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, we definitely did. And can you tell us some of your favorite hypermobility hacks, or a hypermobility hack? I mean, you've already given us like a whole episode full of hacks, but yeah, I—

[1:17:44] Corinne McLees, OT: Yeah, I mean, I would really— so I can give you one for the hands. I just want to reiterate and like hit the ball home on as like your big takeaway from this episode. And then I also wanted to share a few of my own personal like mobility or dysautonomia hacks, if that's okay.

[1:18:00] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Of course.

[1:18:01] Corinne McLees, OT: Like quick ones. Okay. Awesome. so sort of like our home run, like take big takeaway from this is when you become more aware of how hypermobility is affecting your hand movement patterns every single day, and then you make small changes in how you're using your hands, and in more ergonomic ways, like that alone could serve you so well. Like, yes, all the gadgets are fun. All the braces are fun. All the things, all the things we've shown and talked about today. I love our show and tell. They're great. But you could start right now, like without spending money and just really becoming more aware of like how your fingers are bending backwards and during which tasks and really get curious with yourself about how that could be affecting your hand pain. That's my big takeaway. Or my big, I guess, hack for hypermobility in your hands.

[1:18:51] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Great.

[1:18:52] Corinne McLees, OT: and then 3 quick like personal favorite hypermobility dysautonomia hacks that I have learned about myself over the past year. swimming is an incredibly accessible form of exercise for me with my POTS symptoms. I love it. It's amazing. so is abdominal compression. I tried compression socks, but I feel like abdominal compression really helps me personally more than compression socks. Yeah. And then my last one. Oh, go ahead.

[1:19:24] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, I was going to ask, when you say abdominal compression, do you have any— is there a certain brand that you like or a style that you're talking about? Like almost like a corset, right?

[1:19:33] Corinne McLees, OT: I mean, yes, there, that level as well. Like I, I have like a postpartum like abdominal binder that I used when I was postpartum for really like symptomatic days. I mean, even just like compressive, like yoga pants that have like a compressive like seam on them, like a waistband is helpful for me. And I like those more so than than socks. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. My last hack that I have, my last personal hack, because I've been on my own sort of personal journey of understanding and discovering my own health issues. So I've really just over the past year really prioritized 30 minutes of movement each day, however that looks, even if it's just a walk. And that is so important to me.

[1:20:24] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's amazing. I think that's those are really great tips. I love all of those. And you mentioned about your free masterclass, which is going to be fantastic. And I definitely will share the link to that so everyone can see that. And I will share the link to your Instagram account as well because that's really fantastic. Are there other places that people can find you online?

[1:20:47] Corinne McLees, OT: so I have a website, it's just handcoachcorinne.com, where you can find my masterclass. You can find free guides, like I have a few free hand support guides if you want links and ideas for ways to support your hands. And I'm also on Facebook, Hand Coach Corinne, and TikTok too. Okay. Yeah, just it's all the same, Hand Coach Corinne. Yeah.

[1:21:14] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, fantastic. Well, I'm so grateful to you, Corinne, for coming on the Bendy Bodies podcast today. And I just want to remind everybody that they've been listening to the Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD podcast, and your guest today was occupational therapist and hand specialist Corinne McLeese. And Corinne, this has been such an incredible episode, such an incredible conversation. I'm so grateful to you for sharing your knowledge with us.

[1:21:39] Corinne McLees, OT: Thank you so much. This has meant so much to me that you would want me on your podcast to have the space here. I feel like I've like been fangirling over you and your podcast, but to just be able to be here and be a part of the amazing free wealth of knowledge that you share it means so much to me. So I really appreciate your time.

[1:21:58] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, thank you so much. Yeah, people are going to be loving this and I'm sure just so grateful for the information. And thank you. Thank you again. And thank you to all the listeners. And we'll see you next time on the Bendy Bodies Podcast.

[1:22:12] Corinne McLees, OT: Awesome. Thanks.

[1:22:17] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Thank you for listening to this week's episode of the Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD Podcast. Visit our new website at bendybodyspodcast.com where you can now view guest profiles and show notes with links to products and journal articles. Leave me a comment, sign up for updates, leave a review or a voicemail, and access the podcast on your favorite player all directly from our website. You may hear your voicemail in a future episode where we answer your question or dive into your gracious feedback. Follow us on Instagram @bendy_bodies. We love seeing your posts and stories. So be a buddy and engage our community by using the hashtag BendyBuddy. That's hashtag B-E-N-D-Y-B-U-D-D-Y. You can also find me, Dr. Linda Bluestein, on Instagram, Facebook, Twitter, or LinkedIn at HypermobilityMD. Visit hypermobilitymd.com for information about medical services and one-on-one coaching. This podcast is for general informational purposes only and is not constitute the practice of medicine or other professional healthcare services, including the giving of medical advice. No doctor-patient relationship is formed. Do not disregard or delay obtaining medical advice for any medical condition you have. Opinions shared are that of the guest and do not necessarily represent the views of the host or any particular organization. Sponsorship of the podcast does not necessarily mean an endorsement. Thank you for being a part of our community, and we'll catch you next time on the Bendy Bodies Podcast.
