---
num: 112
title: Genetic Testing in EDS with Dr. Paldeep Atwal (Ep 112)
date: '2024-09-26'
duration: 1h 12m
description: >-
  In this enlightening episode of the Bendy Bodies podcast, Dr. Linda Bluestein,
  the Hypermobility MD, is joined by renowned clinical geneticist Dr. Paldeep
  Atwal to delve into the complexities of genetics in hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos
  Syndrome (hEDS) and related conditions. Dr. Atwal explains the importance of
  genetic testing, the significance of variants of uncertain significance
  (VUSs), and the complexities of gene interactions in understanding EDS. They
  also explore the future of genetic research and what patients should know
  about genetic testing to avoid misinformation and unnecessary stress. Whether
  you're new to the world of EDS or looking for cutting-edge insights, this
  episode offers valuable guidance.
tags:
  - EDS
  - Hypermobility
  - Genetics
  - Diagnosis
  - Research
audioUrl: >-
  https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH4404743068.mp3?updated=1733951557
videoUrl: 'https://youtu.be/IgEoHXn-iDo'
snippets: []
guests:
  - Dr. Paldeep Atwal
guestImages:
  - Guests/Paldeep_Atwal.jpg
---
[00:00] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Welcome back, every bendy body, to the Bendy Bodies Podcast with your host and founder, Dr. Linda Bluestein, the Hypermobility MD. Today we'll be talking to geneticist Dr. Paldeep Atwal. I am so excited to talk to Dr. Atwal again after our last conversation that was about 4 and a half years ago. Dr. Atwal and I have a couple of patients in common, and we're going to hear about one particular case that's so interesting because the patient presented really looking very much like they had hypermobile EDS, but Dr. Atwal did genetic testing on this person and discovered that they actually really had a very rare type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome or EDS.

So, genetics is so important. It's so complicated and so nuanced. So this is gonna be a really important conversation. Dr. Atwal is a board-certified clinical and medical biochemical geneticist. He formerly served as Mayo Clinic's medical director for the Center for Individualized Medicine and clinical lead for the Department of Clinical Genomics at the Jacksonville campus. Dr. Atwal's clinical interests include undiagnosed diseases following lengthy diagnostic odysseys and inborn errors of metabolism, including mitochondrial diseases. Through his work, he helped discover two new genetic connective tissue syndromes that result from defects in the FLNA and AEBP1 genes and has published extensively on human genetics with over 100 publications to date. Genetics is a very exciting and very fast-moving field, so this is a really important conversation.

As always, this information is for educational purposes only and is not a substitute for personalized medical advice. Stick around until the very end so you don't miss any of our special hypermobility hacks. Let's get started.

Okay. I am so excited to be here with Dr. Atwal. I spoke to Dr. Atwal back in episode 8 called Demystifying Genetics. That episode was released over 4 years ago. So, in the world of genetics, I'm sure a lot has changed since then. Am I correct about that or?

[02:47] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: You are. And I can't believe that was 4 years ago.

[02:49] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wow.

[02:49] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: That's so long ago. It feels like maybe, maybe 2, but not 4.

[02:54] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right. Actually, Rob looked it up for us. It was actually 4 years and 4 months ago that the episode was released. So we had the conversation, of course, before that. So it's pretty crazy to think that.

[03:06] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: It is really crazy. That's time flies, as they say.

[03:09] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, for sure, for sure. So I just am so excited to chat with you. Of course, so many people have questions when it comes to genetics in this space. So this is such a super important conversation. And maybe you can start by giving us a little Genetics 101, right?

[03:26] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: So, you know, when you think genetics, we really understand genetics very intrinsically. And when we start giving examples such as, you know, why do we look like our parents, right? And why do we have, this similar hair color, eye color, skin color, all of these, all of these physical features. We know what genetics is, and it's these kind of units of hereditary, if you will, that are passed down from one generation to another. And it's what makes us look what we do, think how we do, and grow and develop normally.

And so most of the time you think genetics, you think DNA, right? So DNA is the smallest piece of genetic material that's housed in chromosomes. And then those chromosomes are what's in your cells that really tells your body how to grow and develop. Now, there's a very simple 46 pairs of chromosomes. It's surprising for some people to learn that chromosome 1 to 22, they're numbered based on size. So there's nothing more complicated than that. It's just how big they are. People think there's some weird, interesting formula to figure out why this chromosome is number 1. It's just because it's the biggest one and then 22 is the smallest. And then X and Y, the 23rd group, 2 Xs, you're female. X, having a Y chromosome means you're male. And really, that's the basics of genetics. Obviously there's much more to that that we'll talk about, I'm sure, but that's the basics.

[05:09] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And of course we're going to talk about hypermobile EDS today and related conditions, because we know that there's a lot of differences, right? But there's also a lot of phenotypic overlap. So, could you explain what phenotype and genotype are and why that's important?

[05:27] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Yes. So, genotype is, if we turn the word around a second, it's type of genes, right? So you have it—it's what version or what type of gene do you have of that particular gene. And then the phenotype— pheno is the term used to describe the actual physical clinical presentation in someone. So when we use the term phenotypic expression, it's expression of the genetics in a physical way.

So if the gene, let's say the genotype causes think of something ridiculous like green hair, right? And then the phenotype would be green hair, right? And so the phenotypic expression of that genotype. And then maybe another one causes, you know, bright blue hair. And so you'd have a phenotypic expression based on that genotype. We use the term together in what's called genotype-phenotype correlation. So, and that's very important when they correlate, but also when they don't correlate. So if your genotype says you have— you're supposed to have blue hair and you don't have blue hair, great, they're— they're correlated. But if it doesn't, that's also interesting. So what happened, right? And so when it makes sense, it's useful, but also when it doesn't make sense, it's useful as well. But that's the difference between genotype and phenotype.

[07:02] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So that's really interesting. So you're saying that sometimes you can actually look at the genotype, or like you said, type of gene, and you expect to see a certain type of phenotype from that genotype or the expression of the gene, and it doesn't correlate. It doesn't correlate like you would expect it to. Okay.

[07:21] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: And this happens regularly in my world, of course, because we have— let's say we have a genetic finding that the lab isn't too sure about. So it's my role as the clinical geneticist to look at this and decide if it's clinically meaningful for that patient. So I'll look at the genetics and look at what is expected to happen, right? I'm gonna try and use a different analogy than hair color, but let's say a certain thing is supposed to happen in the body based on that clinical genotype. And the term we use, and you're obviously familiar with this as a physician, is clinical correlation, right? So is there clinical correlation or is there phenotypic expression of that gene or that genotype in the patient?

So for example, you know, I'll see, this happens often in Ehlers-Danlos, I'll do a large panel and then they'll find a variant of uncertain significance in one of the genes in that panel. And the gene is responsible for a very severe skeletal dysplasia that's obviously manifesting from childhood, right? And so the patient naturally is concerned, you know, what does this mean? Is this, 'Do I have this? I looked it up, it looks horrible.' All of that is normal, right? So you look at it and I'll explain that this gene causes this condition and this condition, it's obvious from birth that you have these findings and these will be the findings and they're sitting there 40, 50 years old or 30, whatever they are, not having any of those symptoms. So they don't have clinical correlation, and they're not going to get clinical correlation all of a sudden from a condition like that. You're going to have it from birth. So I tell them, you know, there's no clinical correlation here, there's no genotype-phenotype correlation, and therefore you don't have to worry about that.

[09:14] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, so that's really, really interesting, and we're going to for sure talk about variants of uncertain significance, and we are definitely going to talk about some real challenges in this space, like direct-to-consumer testing and people who don't have a clinical geneticist like you on their team, which is really challenging, right? So probably a number of people are going, wait, what? I didn't think that you could have a genotype and not have the phenotype. So how could that possibly work?

[09:44] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Yeah, I think most of the time we think a single gene change when you have— you expect it to have the phenotype of that gene change. So let's say you have a disease-causing or pathogenic change in a gene. So that's the genotype, right? And you'd expect the phenotype to be whatever disease that was, right? And that's, you know, that there's— that's pretty clear, right? And it may be surprising for some people that that doesn't happen in some conditions. That happens all the time.

So for example, if you take a condition like Huntington disease, a neurodegenerative condition, if you have the genetic change that causes that condition, you're going to get the condition. It's only a matter of time, right? Now contrast that with something like hemochromatosis, a condition of iron overload in the liver. You can have the genetic phenotype, so you can have the genotype for hemochromatosis, meaning 2 abnormal copies of the HFE gene. Only 5% of the time though, you actually have phenotypic expression of full true hemochromatosis. So therefore, around 95% of the time, you have the genetic change, but you don't have hemochromatosis. Most genetic conditions are somewhere in between that.

And people are quite rightly will ask, well, why? This doesn't make any sense. It doesn't make any sense in isolation, but those genes do not live in isolation. Those genes live amongst 20,000 other genes that are having interactions and relationships and effects on each other. And so that's why sometimes it occurs like that, and sometimes you don't see the condition. We're only starting to figure out the complexities between these gene-gene interactions like that. What we really practice currently in medical genetics, for the most part, is Mendelian genetics, named after Gregor Mendel. You probably learned about him in the high school biology textbooks, the peas and dominant and recessive inheritance, where a single gene or single trait is passed down in a certain fashion. And that's, you know, that obviously is true and we see many conditions like that, but there's much more to genetics that we're only starting to uncover. Complex traits, complex disease genetics, gene-gene interactions, and so on and so forth.

[12:13] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wow, that's really fascinating. And I like that you gave two examples that are really on opposite ends of that spectrum. I think that's, those examples I think really help to illustrate the challenges that we can see in genetics. And so that's really, really fascinating.

[12:29] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Wow, okay.

[12:30] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That kind of surprised me, to be honest. I didn't realize that like with hemochromatosis, that you could have 2 abnormal copies of the gene and that only 5% of people would actually get hemochromatosis. I did not know that.

[12:43] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Yeah, it's such a common trait that, thankfully, that's the case, right?

[12:50] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right, right. So what about, okay, you gave those 2 examples, right? Very opposite ends of the spectrum. What about the inheritance patterns for the— we'll put maybe hypermobile EDS aside for a minute because of course we don't know the genetic marker for that yet, but for the other types of EDS, where do they fall in there, do you think?

[13:12] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: So, most other types are dominant. There are some recessive, but most are dominant, meaning you need one abnormal copy of the gene to manifest. And that being said, even within a family, let's say, or a family of classical EDS or a family of vascular EDS or something like that, you'll see a spectrum within the family. So you'll see it manifesting generally. If you have generally the genotype phenotype correlation is high, meaning that if you have the gene changes, it's highly likely, so much closer to the, you know, 100% side of the spectrum that you're gonna see changes.

And just to clarify, since we're really diving in deep into genetics here, to clarify, another way of thinking about this is two genetic concepts that are often confused. And I think it'd be great to have an explanation from a geneticist on this. And it's very important when we understand this. And I explain this to patients all the time as well, or try to, at least. So there's the concept of lack of genotype-phenotype correlation. You could think of it in another way as incomplete penetrance. What do you mean by that?

So incomplete penetrance means the gene does not always manifest the disease, right? So it's because of incomplete penetrance into the physical spectrum or the clinical spectrum, what you actually see in the patient, right? Now, that's different to a similar but distinct genetic concept of variable expression. So you could have a gene that, let's say, in the same family, same gene change, yet sister is more affected than brother, or brother is more affected than sister, or something like that, right? Or parent is more affected than child, or vice versa.

So now it's the same gene, yet in one individual it's affecting them more, the phenotype is more severe, let's say that in a medical context, than the other. Now that term is called variable expression. So yes, they're both penetrant in both, but in one person maybe it's milder and let's say the other is much more severe. So yes, they both have it, but one has it much more than the other. So there's layers and layers to these things, right?

[15:42] Dr. Linda Bluestein: This seems like that also makes it really hard for a condition like hypermobile EDS to find the gene or genes that might be responsible.

[15:52] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Absolutely, absolutely. And I think there's actually clusters of people within hypermobile EDS that are distinct in their own way. You know, you see people that tend to have severe autonomic features, POTS, GI motility issues, gastroparesis, temperature dysregulation. And in some individuals I've seen, the dysautonomic features are their most challenging part of their disease burden, more than the joints, right? So sometimes significantly more. And then there's some individuals or subsets that it's really the mast cell issues, and some don't really have mast cell issues, right? So we've got distinct groups within the group, right?

And you see that in many conditions, right? That's not— that's nothing new, but it's— I think that a lot more work needs to be done to characterize that.

[16:53] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. And that, that paper, I'm trying to remember if you were one of the co-authors on that paper about phenotypic clusters that came out recently, and I think they identified like 3 or 4 different— do you remember seeing that?

[17:03] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Like 3 or 4 different clusters? Yeah, yeah, but I agree with what they— it's very true. And then you see— I see it in clinical practice every day that there's absolutely phenotypic clusters. And yeah, maybe 3 or 4 is a good start. Maybe that's accurate, and maybe it's more. We're just starting to look at that.

[17:23] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, some had a more predominant mast cell picture, like you said. Some had a more predominant, like, neurologic picture, etc. So but that could be gene-gene interactions, influence of the environment, incomplete penetrance, variable expression.

[17:37] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: All of those phrases, all the buzzwords.

[17:41] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, I just thought I'd just throw that all in there, you know, make a little soup out of it.

[17:45] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: And which is what it is.

[17:47] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, yeah, wow, fascinating, fascinating. Okay, so when it comes to the inheritance of hypermobile EDS, can we really actually say anything about that if we really don't know what the genetic marker is?

[18:01] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: That's a great question. And the answer is we can based on, if we take a step back and think historically, prior to the ease and advent of large-scale molecular genetic testing. So if you look at the geneticists before my generation, they didn't have access to genetic testing like we do. They weren't sending exomes, they weren't doing 50+ gene panels and getting them back in a couple of weeks. And they would maybe have access to a single gene they could test for if they're lucky, right? Or they didn't know the gene, right? So they had these big textbooks of human malformation that we had to learn through training, and we had to review and look at.

And you would look at these textbooks for patterns, and then there was this— we use this resource called Mendelian Inheritance in Man. Used to be textbooks, now it's online, right? So these are catalogs of different syndromes. And so once you identify someone has one of these, you can follow what happens in those families over generations. And you can see it is genetic, recurring in that family in a certain pattern. Now we know different patterns infer different inheritance patterns. For example, if you have generation to generation, that's different to only siblings being affected and no generation to generation.

So, and so we see it's generation to generation, and we also see the hallmark of dominant inheritance, which is male-to-male transmission. So a father can pass it on to a son, right? Now, if that doesn't happen in X-linked inheritance, right, and that doesn't happen in mitochondrial inheritance, that obviously doesn't happen in recessive inheritance. So because of those features that have been documented and described throughout the past few decades of describing these kind of Ehlers-Danlos hypermobile and other types of Ehlers-Danlos, we know it's dominant.

And appears. Now, that being said, back to the point you made earlier on phenotype-phenotype, sometimes the expression is highly, very— I mean, often actually the expression is highly, highly variable within a family such that it's questionable whether someone even has it, right? And it's— I get this question all the time, from patients, well, how do I have it, my parents aren't affected? I get that question all the time, and it can be quite challenging. And I think it's even more challenging now because we're used to every genetic condition having a gene that we can test. But that's like the normal now, which is a huge testament to the success of genetics. Like you said, 4 years since we did this podcast is, you know, that's like, you know, 15 years of medicine in terms of genetic advancement, right? And so we're already— the genetic practice, imagine it, practice has changed 4 years ago till now in terms of what testing we're doing, what genes we're looking at, and it'll change another 4 years. So we're really rapid. I mean, think about the rate of change of common clinical practice in a specialty.

[21:27] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I think maybe we should book our next interview now so that we can do it, yeah, in a year instead of in 4 years.

[21:35] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: I agree. Yeah.

[21:38] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And when it comes to hypermobile EDS, and then we know that HSD is we have the 2017 criteria for hypermobile EDS, and then if you have symptomatic joint hypermobility but you don't meet the criteria for hypermobile EDS or have another condition to explain your symptomatic joint hypermobility, that's the current definition of hypermobility spectrum disorder, correct? Right.

[21:58] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: That's correct, yeah.

[22:00] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So, you know, some people— you see people saying, well, but are these really the same condition? Are they different? What are your thoughts on that?

[22:08] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Yeah, I think, I think we need— first, I think we need to do better with the criteria, and, you know, we need to look at a more holistic view of what's really affecting people in terms of clinical criteria. There's not— probably not enough when it comes to— well, certainly not enough in my opinion when it comes to the dysautonomic features and other mast cell involvement, those kind of things. We don't really adding enough of that. I also never like the idea of a very complex diagnosis, you know, genetic condition with multiple overlapping areas and multiple systems involved, simplified down to ticking a couple of boxes and A's, B's, and C's, right?

And I think it's hard to do that. And I think it's not to say it's not useful, it is useful, but if we do that, we miss things, right? And I think with the hypermobility spectrum, it's not my favorite term to use, if I'm honest. I think there's problems with labeling people hypermobility spectrum without giving them, it's, I think people feel a bit in limbo with that diagnosis. And I tend to try and not do that. And look one way or the other.

And there's also a— just on that note, I don't need to tangent, so bring me back if you need to. There's also a group of a subset of patients that I've seen that it's very interesting. They are not hypermobile, yet they have all the other features— POTS, GI motility, mast cell, temperature, even kind of bruising issues and other skin manifestations, but they don't— they're not hypermobile, but they have joint pain. So I think there's a lot more work we need to do to figure out these different groups. And there's likely many categories we don't even realize they're there.

[24:14] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, I definitely have observed that as well. And sometimes it's really challenging because the criteria start with generalized joint hypermobility and since we don't have a lab test for hypermobile EDS at this point in time, but it seems like, I don't know, I don't know what your thoughts are in terms of prevalence. Of course, we don't have good prevalence data, but I'm going to put you on the spot and ask you if you were to take a guess, and we'll come back in like 4 years and we can look back at this episode and say, "Okay, how close were you?" If you were to take a guess, what would you think?

[24:49] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Well, can I qualify my— Of course.

[24:55] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, yes, of course.

[24:57] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: I'm going to call it an educated guess. With some history. So, so there's another genetic condition called Fabry disease. It's a lysosomal storage disorder. And prior to the advent of molecular genetic diagnosis, there was a, I don't recall the numbers, so, but there was a, let's say it was, you know, let's just give an example, right? One in a million, right? And then, we were able to test for it genetically. And then the biggest thing that came was a treatment for it. And once that started— sorry, it was already being able to test it for, but no one was interested in testing because there's no treatment, right?

[25:35] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

[25:35] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: So, once there's a treatment, everyone started getting tested for it, and then more— then suddenly the prevalence or the incidence became much, much higher, right? So it was from 1 in a million to 1 in, let's just say, again, can't remember the numbers right now, 1.5 million. And then it started, then it was put on newborn screening in certain states. So now we're looking at it at every child at birth. So the numbers have changed, you know, thousandfold in magnitude in terms of prevalence.

Right? And I think if you look at historically what people thought about hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos, something similar may happen in that I think the true prevalence is closer to 1 in 1,000, even maybe even less than. so we're on par with things like, type 1 diabetes, right? It's much more common than we realize and very underdiagnosed, very underrecognized. It's a specialty. The specialty for the diagnosis is mainly medical genetics, but most geneticists reside in children's hospitals. They don't see adults. Many patients manifest or are already in adulthood. So we have these compounding problems leading, and there's hardly any geneticists in the country to begin with. And this is just the US. I see patients all over the world and they don't have a geneticist in their country to even make a diagnosis. And I'm not talking about small countries, I'm talking about big, you know, billion-plus population countries that are struggling with these issues.

And so we, I think there's, for all those reasons that I mentioned, I'm going to say much closer to 1 in 1,000 or less.

[27:26] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And when you say or less, you mean that—

[27:28] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: oh, sorry, or 1 in 500 to 1 in 100, right?

[27:30] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right. Yeah. I just wanted to make sure that I understood and that to make it clear. Yeah.

[27:34] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: So thank you for clarifying.

[27:36] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes. Yes, of course. Of course. Okay. So we're going to take a quick break and when we come back, we are going to cover a bunch of other fantastic genetics topics with Dr. Atwal, including direct-to-consumer testing. So we'll be right back.

We are back with Dr. Atwal. I'm so excited to chat with you some more about EDS and all of these complicated genetics that I think nowadays part of the confusion is, you know, you can just shop online like you're shopping for clothes, you know, and purchase your own genetic tests. And I think that people might really be blown away by the first part of this conversation, at least I feel like I am, you know, to realize that there are some conditions where, whether it's variable expression, incomplete penetrance, gene-gene interactions, that, you know, A doesn't always equal B.

[29:28] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Yes. And I think as well, it's the quality of the testing in question. I've worked and helped with a number of companies looking to facilitate genetic testing, which is great, and that's a very good thing to facilitate it. Now, in that capacity, we all— we almost became like a mini regulator. So we would only look at supporting tests if they were clinically valid and clinically meaningful. I think that the average member of the public would think if a test is available, there must be some good, you know, regulation that has gone through to ensure that it's clinically relevant, clinically meaningful, and has clinical utility. Now, they may be surprised to hear that that's actually, in some cases, that's not the case.

For example, I remember in that capacity, I had a test come to me that they were offering genetic testing to see what position in a football team you would be best at. Are you serious? Yeah, I'm serious. I'm serious. Yeah, I'm serious. So, you know, they're— I don't even— I didn't even look at it. I mean, I looked at it, of course, but obviously this is nonsense, right? And they're taking— the other thing people look at is they take odds ratios and try and apply them to create big effect sizes when they don't exist.

For example, and this is another thing that it's difficult to explain, but when you explain it in this fashion, it's not. If someone tells you your risk of something doubles, well, usually that's kind of alarming, right? If somebody's risk is doubled, and if it's a cancer or something else, then, you know, then of course, more alarm. Now, if I told someone, look, your risk of this particular rare cancer is, I don't know, 1 in 10 million, and they say, okay, and I said, and I now say, now your risk, by the way, is 1 in 5 million. Now, that's not really a meaningful change to me. I don't know about you, Linda, but it's not really a meaningful change. But I could also say your risk is doubled for this, right?

Right. And so I think taking things into context is critical, right? And so that's one thing with the testing. The second is, you know, I talked about quality. There's quality in all aspects of the genetic test process. Just like any other test process, there's the quality of the collection, there's the extraction of the DNA, there's quality control in that extraction to ensure there's enough quality good DNA to be able to run and run the report. Then there's the actual quality of the sequencing. The sequencing for the most part is actually generally done well by most labs. It's very standardized, often on the same platforms. The biggest issue comes after the sequencing, in interpretation and sign-out of the findings.

The human genome is very much like reading kind of hieroglyphics, in the sense that seeing it is the easy part. Like, you can— like, we all look at it, but to understand what it means is the complex part, right? And so the understanding is really the challenge and creating clinical relevance in that understanding is even a second challenge. So that part is really the hard part in genetic testing. And that's actually the part that takes a lot of time and effort and skill by molecular lab-based molecular geneticists and molecular pathologists and other specialists.

So that being said, offering a sequence and then having, you know, giving you kind of a very rudimentary filtering algorithm to kind of play about with on your computer is not good in terms of quality interpretation. And I see, I get these reports sent to me all the time, almost every day, at least every week. And there's hundreds and hundreds of red light variants I tell the patients, I call it the traffic light sign, right? So whenever you see a test that qualifies your genetic report or the variants in red, yellow, green, or each one is, I'm not saying it's wrong, the test is bad, I'm not saying that, but I'm saying that's a bit of a red flag. Just be cautious, proceed with caution. And you often see that the traffic light sign in many of these poor, not very accurate reports.

[34:40] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I see that all the time. I just saw that yesterday, literally. Somebody brought me their report. So that is really interesting. I feel like, like you said, we think that if it's being allowed, it must be be, like you said, regulated in some way and be high enough quality information. And then if we get a report back and it says that we have certain genetic markers for things, that now it's in writing. And especially if it's, like you said, got the red light, green light, yellow light, it is hard to think it might not be accurate. Like that's, I feel like—

[29:28] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Of course.

[35:22] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

[35:23] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: So let me give you an example. So I, and this is not one isolated incident, I've seen this a number of times. So let me just give you this example because it's kind of the scariest example, if you will, or one of these. So a patient thinks they have Ehlers-Danlos, right? They've researched online, they've looked at it all, and they decide to order a test by themselves, which in a, in a, with a test that they in good conscience think this is the right test, this is a good test, right? And, and so they order the test and it comes back, they have a pathogenic variant in collagen 3 or COL3A1 for vascular EDS. Now they're freaking out, right? I, I, yeah, they're worried that, oh, I have, you know, I thought I had hypermobile, but now this test saying I have vascular EDS, right? And so they're worried, and you know, they're worried about them, they're worried about their kids.

So the next thing, they eventually make an appointment to see me or another geneticist, and I'll look at them, I'll do a proper history, clinical assessment. There's some facial features that you can see and other features they don't have them. But what am I supposed to do? They have this report saying this variant, right? I look the variant up, and, you know, the variant is actually— actually, there's two scenarios that can happen here. So let me tell you the first scenario when I look the variant up. First scenario is the variant, by every other, let's call it, let's say reputable clinical lab, is reported as non-disease-causing. So there's, you know, you look, even looking up in ClinVar, right, ClinVar clinical variation database, all of the— I don't necessarily name labs, but, you know, good clinical grade labs, let's call them, will report their interpretation of that variant when they've seen it, as and when they've seen it. And so if all of them are saying it's benign and this lab is saying it's disease-causing, well, I'm not— I'm going to trust the clinical grade labs over this lab. So I'll say that to the patient. Hopefully that reassures them. But it's all— they've also gone through a lot of psychological stress. It's a huge amount of stress at that point. Unnecessarily.

The second scenario is the variant that has been found is disease-causing, but in ClinVar and as reported by the other labs. So the variant is known to cause disease. So what I'll say in that point is, look, let's check that if you truly have this variant by a clinical-grade test. Right, so I'll order a test from a lab that I would feel comfortable standing behind those results, right? Because currently I'm not comfortable standing behind those results, right? And so, and the test will come back negative. And, and, and just to be clear, specifically, I'll ask the patient— the patient, sorry, I'll ask the lab, this is— I'll send them all the report too— this is the variant that you must look at. Of all the variants— of course we can look at the whole gene— of all the variants, this is the one you need to look at. And they say, no, that wasn't there. It was the wild-type variant. It was a normal variant.

[38:34] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And this has actually happened? This is multiple times. Really? Wow. Okay, that's, that's scary because, I mean, people are going through incredibly stressful things. Like you said, we have a shortage of geneticists, so some people can't get in to see a geneticist, and maybe they're so therefore they're doing, they're purchasing testing online and they may make decisions about having a family or not having a family based on that information.

[39:02] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: It's frightening, very frightening actually. That, you know, when it comes to things like family planning, recurrence, all of these things, that's when you really start thinking. We have this thing in genetics. We don't just treat— we don't treat patients, we treat families. Really, that's what we do. We're often— it's, you know, the person's there ostensibly for themselves, but actually, when you really get into it and start talking about family history, they'll tell you, look, I actually have 3 kids, and I'm starting with me, but I'm really more concerned about my kids than me. Yeah, so they're really interested more about family rather than— or interested about family rather than just themselves. And so that's what we deal with all the time in genetics. That's the nature of genetics, as we said at the start, is, you know, we look like our parents, we look like our family. So why do we do that? And that's genetics in a nutshell.

[40:00] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So if someone can't access a geneticist, you know, I mean, I obviously evaluate people all the time for hypermobile EDS and related conditions, and I have obviously a very different background than you have as an anesthesiologist, and I'm much more focused on people's pain, but especially if they're really, really I'm concerned about vascular EDS, or if I find some other indicators, then I will order genetic testing from, like you said, a clinical lab. I will do that for people when I feel that it is appropriate. But what else do you think people can do if they can't get in to see a geneticist? Maybe they can't get in to see me or somebody like me who does, you know, do some amount of genetic testing, even though we're not a geneticist. So my ability to interpret the information is gonna be less. What do you think that person should do?

[40:48] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: So there's a couple of options. Let's just try and explore this now. So first is there's the standard medical model where patient goes to the doctor, doctor decides what test to order and orders on behalf of the patient. And that's— we're all used to that, we don't need an explanation of that. Now, I would not say— I wouldn't say recently because it's not that recent, but direct-to-consumer testing where you can go and buy a test yourself. And have the results of that without physician involvement. And we just talked about some of the pitfalls that can happen with that. Not to say it's all negative, by the way, just to be clear, right? It's not all negative.

But there's a, I won't call it a sub-element of direct-to-consumer, I would call it a third option, if you will. Whereas there's these patient-initiated or consumer-initiated testing where there's companies out there that you can go there, go to the company and express an interest in this test, let's say a connective tissue gene panel or something like that. And they can either help facilitate with your own doctor or they can use one of their doctors to review the appropriateness based on some sort of questionnaire they might give you or some other mechanism and say, yes, this is appropriate for you. And you know, you'll pay for the test. And then they also provide follow-up, and whether it's with a genetic counselor, whether with a physician themselves, or someone with the knowledge to interpret that result.

Because as you know very well, there's the results for genetic testing is challenging. I have regularly have patients when we do the connective tissue gene panel, for example, I regularly have patients say, well, wait, 'Well, so does this mean I don't have hypermobility yet?' When it comes back negative. So, you know, and then I have to explain, you know, we haven't found the gene for that subtype. We tested for all the other subtypes to make sure you don't have something that can cause vascular fragility, aneurysms, all of those things. We don't— we want to make sure you're not at risk for them. And so then they understand that, no, it's not— I'm not saying we don't have— it's actually helping us to reconfirm we have that because we looked at these other things that can be similar in presentation, have overlapping phenotypes, going back to the phenotype word, but ultimately significant, potentially life-threatening differences. That's why we did the test in the first place. So just to have that discussion and explanation why you're doing the test is really necessary, I think, for someone. It's not it's not easy to navigate such a complex world of genetic testing, even for a top physician like you. It's hard, right? So, I think for the patient to do it themselves, it's very challenging.

[43:42] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, it's very, very challenging. And I have ordered, you know, like you said, there's specific panels, right? And then we can do whole exome sequencing, we can do whole genome sequencing. I've ordered whole exome sequencing before for a couple— actually, one of them is a patient that we have in common. And shockingly, it came back with one word: negative. I was like— and this person, yeah, I was shocked. I was absolutely shocked. So I guess in terms of what panel to order and when it comes back with that one word negative, but people do have variants of uncertain significance, I guess, do they report it that way? Because the variants of uncertain significance, none of them are clearly pathogenic, or I guess what are your thoughts on that?

[44:27] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Right, so the labs, they all have a slightly different structure and how they report things, but in general they'll see negative, some will say negative when they don't find any pathogenic variants and any variants of uncertain significance, some will say negative only if they don't find pathogenic variants, but if they find variants of uncertain significance, they won't say negative, they'll say intermediate or unclear or something like that, right? And so they'll qualify that with different categories of result. And there's a whole counseling on genetic results that you go through the different categories. Pathogenic variants related to their phenotype, pathogenic variants unrelated to their phenotype. So you're testing someone, you're doing an exome or someone with EDS, but then you find out they have, you know, cardiomyopathy that isn't related, right? And then there are unclear variants related and unrelated to their phenotype. And then often in these tests, there's the American College of Medical Genetics reportable variants that they like to have in the BRCA genes, other ones that if you're looking at someone's exome or genome, then they recommend you, you find a disease-causing variant in one of them, you should let the patient know, or you should offer. And usually the patient has to consent into that before you do the test, right?

And then now some of the labs are now doing offering pharmacogenetic variants in addition. So now you've got all these pharmacogenetic variants, so the exome and the genome becomes this huge complex just to go, even if it's mostly or all negatives, is hugely complex thing that takes a long time. So how do you scale that discussion to ensure, one, the patient understands what happened, and two, you have enough time to do that for all patients getting genome sequencing? Because it's only increasing, right? And as the cost's going down, as availability and access goes up, which are all good things, how do you ensure that we have an ability to do that. I don't really know the answer. Yeah.

[46:39] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And when it comes to variants of uncertain significance, if we were to do whole genome sequencing on, I don't know how many, pick a number of people, they're all going to have some variants of uncertain significance, right? Of course. That's, yeah, yeah.

[46:52] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: We all have unique variants unique to us, otherwise we wouldn't be unique, right? Right. So the question, as for the lab, when they see these, some of them are easy. They're synonymous and they don't cause protein sequence changes or any— not near splice sites. So that's easy for the lab to interpret and safely call as non-disease-causing. Some of them are challenging. I think the ways we get around that— now we're in a discussion on variant interpretation, right? Now, one thing that's really helped— one thing that's really helped us is having larger and larger and larger databases. I remember when there was, you know, the 1000 Genomes Project, right? And then the UK came out with UK10K. That was kind of a catchy phrase they had, right? 10,000 genomes. Then there was 100,000 Genomes Project. Now I don't even know how many there are in ExAC and NOMAD. We've got huge amounts of data, and it's only increasing. And more than that, we also have a more diverse database with more ethnic back— people with more diverse ethnic backgrounds, which actually helps everyone. In fact, it helps people with different ethnic background more than it helps people of the same ethnic background because it tells you what's related, what's common, what's uncommon.

And so all of that put together is helping, long story, is helping our interpretation of genetic variants across all populations. And you'll see very commonly when you order a test, a year or two after you'll get an amended report from the lab saying, you know, we feel comfortable now this variant is not disease causing. We've downgraded it from variant of uncertain significance to benign. One more point on the variant classification. There's currently 5 levels of variant classification. That may change in the future, so there's, to reflect the complexities of variant interpretation, so there might even be more levels of it. So, you know, pathogenic, likely pathogenic, VUS, likely benign, benign. There might be more than that, reflecting the very challenging area of genetics of what does this gene change mean.

[49:15] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. And speaking of challenging and gene changes, you probably are going to anticipate this question. The calicrine gene variants that were found by the Norris lab, are you able to share your thoughts on that?

[49:28] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: I think it's a very— well, first, I think the fact that knowledgeable, highly intelligent group like the Norris Lab are looking at this is great. We need more. We need 5 Norris Labs, right? And so I think that's fantastic. I think some of the evidence is very strong and this has a role. I would like to wait until it goes through the formal process of once you have a research finding, you put it together, you publish that finding, it goes through a peer review process where it's looked at by other experts in that area, and then goes through that process, and then it's published, then confirmed by others as well. I think, I think I'm tentatively positive, I'll say that. I'd like to see, you know, we just need to wait until it goes through the process, I think. But I'm tentatively quite positive about it, and I think it's a major step forward.

Let's just— I'm happy to be hypothetical for a second. If it goes— everything goes through and we can offer testing for that, I think that will be something that will be a positive step in the community. Now, obviously, we're not going to suddenly find the gene change for every single patient with hypermobile EDS just because of based on one study and one finding, right? There's likely many reasons that we haven't been able to find the genetic basis of hypermobile EDS. We talked about a few things. We talked about different subgroups within the EDS. We talked about the complexities of genetics, the genotype, variable expression, gene-gene interaction. We're not able to test for a lot of those things right? So if we're not able to test for it and if that's the cause, then perhaps we're missing it.

Additionally, the genetic sequencing technology we're using mostly is short-read technology, which is changing, but there are things that are difficult to capture with that technology that you require different sequencing technology, long-read, to see complex rearrangements, triplet repeat disorders, and other deletions of certain sizes can be missed on short-read sequencing and not seen on chromosomal-level copy number variation. So, you know, a deletion of around 1,000 base pairs, it's almost impossible, very difficult, very challenging to detect those things. Now, so there's gaps, so we need to start filling those things, and maybe it's in one of those gaps that the answer lies. I don't know.

[52:19] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And given all of these complexities and the challenges that we face, but also at the same time with these vast panels that— they're either panels that we can do or doing, like you said, the price has come down dramatically for doing whole exome or whole genome sequencing. If someone has red flags for a rare type of EDS or red flags for, like you said, vascular fragility or something, then I would think that genetic testing would for sure be indicated in those instances. But kind of as a general rule, what, what do you think are good indicators for genetic testing or good indicators that it's maybe not needed in the context of, I guess, somebody presenting with symptomatic joint hypermobility and they suspect that they have hypermobile EDS?

[53:04] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: So that's a, yeah, it's a very relevant question from my perspective. The threshold is fairly low given the ease of which, thankfully, the ease of which certainly gene panel testing is available. So, if someone presents with hypermobile EDS, we go through other features and factors related to Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and other related conditions, Marfan, other things like that. Really, if there's a small concern at this stage with the ease of genetic testing, I don't have a, I usually order testing for them. I think the other problem that I've seen in clinical practice is if someone doesn't have the testing. Now let's say they have hypermobile EDS, but you're very sure it's hypermobile EDS and you think, you know, you don't need the testing. I'm very confident you don't have anything else. And that's fine. And this has happened. That's why I'm telling you it's happened to patients. They'll come back later and say, look, this cardiologist I saw, or the surgeon I saw, I need the surgery, or whatever it is, they won't do the testing for me because I've never— I, I wasn't tested for vascular EDS or some other, you know, something else. And they're not comfortable to do it, to do their procedure or surgery or whatever intervention they're thinking of doing unless that's been ruled out by a genetic test. So it creates barriers for the patient down the road unknowingly, just from my experience in clinical practice. I'm not saying those barriers are correct, just to be clear, but I'm saying those barriers do exist.

So with that experience and that wherewithal of what will happen to the patient, because the patients often see me once or twice and I'll never, I may or may not see them again. I want to make sure in that interaction I've done everything possible for them. So 5 years down the line, they are, it's still useful to them, if that makes sense, right? Or it's still, so doing that will help in those instances. And secondly, there's a big worry and anxiety component people have when it comes to the testing, particularly for subtypes that cause vascular issues and aneurysms. And clinical reassurance by a medical geneticist, I think, is very valuable, but seeing that negative result has a personal utility for the patients, in my mind. And subsequently, I think that has a clinical utility.

[55:37] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, and I'm thinking of somebody that we also have in common who you diagnosed with classical-like type 2, and I know this is so incredibly rare that you might even know who this is offhand. Yeah, this is the AEBP1-related, right? Type 2 classical-like, but that person, hypermobile EDS was what was suspected. And I saw them after they had their diagnosis from you, but this is somebody that you did do genetic testing on. Hypermobile EDS was suspected and it came back that they actually had this extremely rare type. So that's a great example that—

[56:12] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: It's a great example and a great example why we do the testing. These are called subtypes of Ehlers-Danlos for a reason, subtypes of overlapping similar presenting conditions. Now, as good as we are clinically, we must know our limitations that sometimes it's really impossible to clinically differentiate. And so we have to rely on this, on additional molecular testing, genetic testing, to ensure we're doing what's best for the patient.

[56:42] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And in that classical-like type 2, if I remember correctly, there's different implications in terms of screening for vascular issues, right? So, yeah.

[56:50] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Vascular issues, bone density issues, other screening issues as well, other medically relevant things that make it important to differentiate, to your point.

[57:01] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right. Yeah. So, that's not just like an interesting thing, but that's a—

[57:05] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: No, right. It's a useful, clinically useful, meaningful difference that's going to benefit the patient and their health long-term.

[57:14] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, yeah. Wow, definitely. And then you mentioned briefly about genomics and pharmacogenomic testing. Before we wrap up, if you could maybe tell us, and I'm sure we could have spent the whole time talking about genetics versus genomics, but if you could maybe, we had a little bit of this conversation 4 years ago, 4 years and 4 months, but if you could just tell us a little bit about where things are at with genomics, what the difference is, and why some people might be considering that. 'Cause also that there's direct-to-consumer testing for that as well. Right, so.

[57:48] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Well, let me address the genetics genomics piece and then the pharmacogenetics piece or pharmacogenomics, which I'll address the difference there. So, I've heard a lot of people talk about genetics versus genomics. And from my perspective as a geneticist, I don't see a difference. Now, some people will tell you genetics is looking at a single gene and genomics is looking at all of genes in the, the holistic view of many genes interacting together. And I didn't realize that's not the case with medical genetics. Like, and I think they're really interchangeable in my mind, and many people may disagree, but I think we are arguing semantics at this point. I don't think it really is a true— for me, I don't think, oh no, I better change what I'm saying. It's not genetics, I need to say genomics. And I'm not— I can't say genomics, it needs to say genetics because I'm looking at a single gene. I don't know any geneticist that looks at single genes anymore. And so, you know, it might be a— the difference may just be reflective of changing times. When we were only able to look at a gene, it was genetics. Now genetics means thousands of genes at the same time. Genomics, the board or the American Society, our college, sorry, of Genetics and Genomics, and so I think they're trying to play the field and just call both, you know.

I'm a fellow of that college. I, I think, you know, I, I don't— I call myself a medical or clinical geneticist, not maybe I should say clinical geneticist and genomicist. I don't know, what do you think?

[59:28] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I don't know, that's an excellent, that's an excellent question.

[59:33] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Yeah, so the, the second thing on pharmacogenomics— I don't even know what to say, should I say genetics or pharmacogenomics? I think it is pharmacogenomics is the term used, is, looking at how your genetics influences your body's metabolism of certain drugs and medications. Now, most of these are CYP enzymes in the liver that either upregulate or downregulate your metabolism of those conditions, which depending on— this is also complicated— depending on whether it's a prodrug given as a prodrug or active form, that can cause higher or lower levels, right? And so, it's used in a variety of different areas of medicine. Psychiatry, believe it or not, is probably the most commonly used area, which kind of is unusual, right? You don't think genetics and psychiatry as being the kind of the forefront of a certain area of genetic testing, but it is. And other areas as well, obviously even in anesthesiology, of course, as you know, with the risk of malignant hyperthermia. There's a couple of genes, ARVR1 for example, and that is on all of these panels. So the labs are now giving these variants or these interpretations out to, one, I think provide a more complete coverage of testing. It's not just, not simply clinical variants, it's also pharmacogenetic variants.

One of the issues is, finding someone to interpret that. And, you know, what we do certainly is we have a pharmacist who's trained in pharmacogenomics and sits with the patient, makes a medication action plan based on that. Not, and doesn't just look at the genetics because genetics is not an isolation or genomics is not an isolation. It's also other drugs that are on drug-drug interactions. So there's, you think of these, you could think of these as gene-drug interactions. But then there's drug-drug interactions, there's phenoconversion. Having— being on drug A can actually influence how well or slow drug B is being metabolized. So that's all relevant in the soup, as you referred to earlier. It all plays a role together. You can't take them in isolation. So that's why looking at all of them together is the right thing, the right way to look at it.

[1:02:02] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, that's really fascinating. And I know that yes, in psychiatry, this was something that was definitely done many, many years ago, and definitely it seems like it's becoming more common. Do we have the same problem with not just difficulty in interpreting the information, but possible inaccurate results if people are doing the direct-to-consumer level of lab versus the clinical lab?

[1:02:29] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: I think the inaccuracy— exist in all aspects of testing if the right processes aren't followed. I always look for labs to have CLIA and CAP certification, through all aspects of their testing, not simply the sequencing part. Well, they're not going to give it if it's just one part, but they— these kind of validation recognition from regulators and testing. So these regulators will regularly submit a sample to the lab and ask them what's in the sample to ensure that they're able to detect the right things. So they're always being challenged and made sure, and being made sure to show that they're able to detect the right variants when they are there or not there. So I think the short answer, yes, the risk remains even in pharmacogenetic testing. Most pharmacogenetic testing looks at certain polymorphisms of the gene, so the testing's often a little bit simpler. But that being said, now there are groups looking at doing full sequencing of those genes to look for other variants that are not even on those panels that could be missed. So if you have a test that only looks for presence of a variant, you don't find that variant, that doesn't mean there's not something else that you didn't look for that's also relevant in terms of drug metabolism.

[1:03:59] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And there's other things besides drug metabolism, right, that we can look at for genomics? Yeah, yeah.

[1:04:05] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Yes. Oh, absolutely. There's now, there's complex traits. So polygenic risk scores for cardiovascular disease, diabetes risk, cholesterol, other, other, all sorts of, all sorts of conditions, neurodegenerative conditions as well. These are still nascent in many ways that it's, I think that there, we'll see a lot more of that in the next 3 to 5 years. Maybe at our next blog we can talk more about that.

[1:04:37] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Yeah. I can't wait to see what that conversation's gonna be like. Okay. So I like to wrap up every episode with a hypermobility hack. What hack do you have for us? So like some quick tip or quick win for people?

[1:04:52] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Hypermobility hack. So this has to be a physical thing?

[1:04:57] Dr. Linda Bluestein: It could be anything. It could be anything. So basically you've given us already quite a few, like looking for a CLIA-certified lab, for example, and looking for labs that maybe you have the ability to— it's not just direct-to-consumer testing, but the direct access for ordering. So, something that people can do, that they could— a tip that they can take away right away.

[1:05:21] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: I think one tip that I, I try and— well, let me give a couple. So, so the first, very simple, avoid things that make your joints worse: impact exercises and maximal stretching. So they go to the limits of their— if they do, if they like to stretch, and many people like to stretch, it makes them feel better try and limit it to around 80% of what they can do. And then the other one, I think maybe the most important, is work, at least for a small time, dedicate some time to working with a knowledgeable physical therapist trained in Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome. Ideally, that's someone that usually they have the condition. If they have Ehlers-Danlos themselves, that's a great sign. So, so someone that really knows about it. And I can work with them and look at how they're doing certain movements, work to reprogram certain things, and certain muscles are activating, how they're doing certain joints, certain movements. It's amazing how inefficient some people are moving, hence they're more tired, hence they've got more pain. Just reprogramming how they're doing simple movements they're doing dozens and dozens of times a day makes a huge difference.

[1:06:33] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That makes a lot of sense. Okay. So before we really, really wrap up, I first of all, I just want to thank you so much for coming on the Bendy Bodies Podcast again and sharing your vast wisdom and knowledge with us. This is such an important topic and I feel like it's so much more nuanced than most people realize. So thank you so very much.

[1:06:56] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Thanks. It's always a pleasure. You know, like, like you said, let's plan, maybe a maximum of 2 years, if not 1 year next time.

[1:07:04] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, definitely. and before you go, can you let us know, first of all, where to find you, and also if you have any special projects, research that you're doing that we should be aware of?

[1:07:17] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Yeah, so I'm based in West Palm Beach, Florida. I do also, in terms of clinical practice, I see patients in the office in downtown West Palm Beach, and also online as well. Many patients choose due to travel reasons and difficulty, they can't travel, so they see me online. So I, I'm doing a, some, I have a couple of cases that we're publishing on unusual presentations and types of EDS. I'm on some new genetic findings, or not new genes but new, new variants in those genes. That I've got some students working on. And I'm also, I'm also doing more education. I'm planning on a, well, maybe I can recruit you right now. I'm planning on a one-day kind of conference for patients, patient-focused, where I bring in, I'll talk, I bring in some experts, and we really talk about different aspects of Ehlers-Danlos. I think that, like you said, there's many patients that just don't have access to geneticists, don't have access to people like you and I, and it's something that they could watch from their house and they can, similar to the education you're doing here, they can really take away from experts in the area things that may be of use to them, or at least help them advocate for themselves as well. So I'm hoping to do that within the next year or so.

[1:08:44] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That sounds fantastic, and I would, I would love to be involved. I think that's a wonderful idea, like a boot camp.

[1:08:51] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Yes, yeah, yeah, one day, just a one-day thing. Yeah, yeah, yeah.

[1:08:55] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I think so many people could benefit from that, and I think that, you know, these conditions require people from so many different disciplines, or I should say, maybe would benefit from people with different backgrounds. So I, I love that idea. I think that's really, really great.

[1:09:11] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Yeah. Cardiologist, GI motility specialist, physical therapy, of course, physiatry, medically trained doctors who specialize in physical medicine, pain management, of course, it's huge. So many neurosurgery, all of these, all of these, actually, you know, I'm going to have to ask too many already.

[1:09:33] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I was just going to say, this is sounding more like— but that's okay. I mean, I think everything's an evolution, right? So you and I have been communicating for a number of years, even before we had our conversation, you know, 4 and a half or so years ago. And your practice has evolved. My practice has evolved. We're constantly trying to meet the needs of our patients as best we can and be able to offer them the kind of support that we want them to have.

[1:10:01] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Absolutely. Yes, that's the goal.

[1:10:04] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, well, thank you so much again. It was so great to see you finally, and I look forward to our next conversation.

[1:10:11] Dr. Paldeep Atwal: Likewise, it was a really pleasure. Thank you, Linda.

[1:10:13] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, absolutely. Oh my gosh, that was such a great conversation with Dr. Atwal, and I'm so grateful to him for coming on the podcast a second time. We will definitely have him back much sooner than 4 years and 4 months from now and get a follow-up conversation about genetics. Because as I'm sure you are now very well aware, it's so much more complicated and so much more nuanced than most of us are aware. I know I learned a lot from this conversation, so I hope you did as well.

And thank you so much for listening to this week's episode of the Bendy Bodies Podcast with the Hypermobility MD. You can help us spread the word about joint hypermobility and related disorders by leaving a review and sharing the podcast. This helps raise awareness about these very complex conditions. If you would like to meet with me one-on-one, check out the available options on the services page of my website, hypermobilitymd.com. You can also find me, Dr. Linda Bluestein, on Instagram, Facebook, TikTok, Twitter, or LinkedIn at Hypermobility MD. You can find Human Content, my producing team, @humancontentpods on TikTok and Instagram. You can find full video episodes up every week on YouTube at Bendy Bodies Podcast. To learn about the Bendy Bodies Program disclaimer and ethics policy, submission verification and licensing terms, and HIPAA release terms, or to reach out with any questions, please visit bendybodiespodcast.com. Bendy Bodies Podcast is a Human Content production. Thank you for being a part of the community, and we'll catch you next time on the Bendy Bodies Podcast.
