---
num: 125
title: "Strategies for POTS Relief with Dr. Satish Raj (Ep 125)"
date: "2024-12-26"
duration: "1h 22m"
description: "In this episode of the Bendy Bodies podcast, Dr. Linda Bluestein speaks with leading autonomic specialist Dr. Satish Raj about POTS (Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome), dysautonomia, and orthostatic intolerance. Dr. Raj delves into the complexity of these conditions, including their diverse causes, challenges in diagnosis, and innovative treatments. Learn why POTS is a \"feeling faint\" disorder rather than a fainting disorder, the role of compression garments and increased sodium intake, and how non-pharmacological treatments form the foundation of care. Packed with practical advice and expert insights, this episode is essential listening for anyone navigating POTS or related conditions."
tags:
  - "EDS"
  - "POTS"
  - "Exercise"
  - "Diagnosis"
  - "Treatment"
  - "Neurology"
  - "Hypermobility"
audioUrl: "https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH5462151653.mp3?updated=1734315710"
videoUrl: "https://youtu.be/2WuDkH1TDns"
snippets: []
guests:
  - "Dr. Satish Raj"
guestImages: []
---
Welcome back, Every Bendy Body, to the Bendy Bodies podcast with your host and founder, Dr. Linda Bluestein, the hypermobility MD. This is going to be a really exciting conversation. I know so many of you have had questions about POTS and other forms of dysautonomia, and we are going to be talking to Dr. Raj about this incredibly important topic today.

This has touched me personally. As I had dysautonomia in both of my pregnancies, which I understand we're going to talk about is not a specific diagnosis in and of itself, but literally that's what they put on my paperwork was dysautonomia of pregnancy and both times I was started on beta blockers. I do want to give you a brief little warning. That, uh, we recorded this early in the morning and I must have still been half asleep. I forgot to turn on my good microphone.

So the actual interview was recorded using my computer microphone. So if you notice a difference in sound quality, that's why. Okay, let's talk about Dr. Satish Raj. He is a heart rhythm cardiologist.

He spent 12 years working at the Vanderbilt Autonomic Dysfunction Center in Nashville, Tennessee. He then moved back to Canada and founded the Calgary Autonomic Investigation and Management Clinic. His primary research interests relate to the understanding and better treatment of POTS, vasovagal syncope, and orthostatic hypotension. Dr. Raj is a former president of the American Autonomic Society and he also serves as a medical advisor to many POTS patients groups and he is a part of the EDS Comorbidity Coalition Working Group.

I am so excited to have this conversation with Dr. Raj because I know that so many of you have had so many questions about POTS. As always, this information is for educational purposes only and is not a substitute for personalized medical advice. Be sure to stick around until the very end so you don't miss any of our special hypermobility hacks. Let's get going.

Well, I am here with Dr. Satish Raj and I'm so excited to finally get to chat with you about POTS, Dysautonomia, Basal Vagal Syncope, um, so many of the things that you treat and that are so important for this population of people. We are doing this fairly early in the morning, uh, at least where I, where I live. Um, hopefully you're a little bit more awake than I am this morning. Well, um, I have an hour on you, I'm in the, I'm in the mountain time zone, the forgotten time zone as I like to call it.

So I didn't realize that you were on mountain time. I'm on mountain time also. So there you go. Wonderful. Um, let's start out by talking about what is dysautonomia, and if that's a good umbrella term to use, and why is this topic so crucially important for people with bendy bodies?

So, I think it's, it's a term that's useful as a concept, but perhaps not as a diagnosis. So, dysautonomia is a shorthand Uh, way of saying that there's a dysfunction in the autonomic nervous system. Right, so dis and auto from the autonomic nervous system. And it's one of those things that's actually at some level fairly common. Um, there's a spectrum obviously of things that can be wrong and the spectrum of severity of how badly things can be wrong.

But one of the challenges, uh, I guess first is trying to understand what is the autonomic nervous system. And. One of my colleagues, uh, in Los Angeles, actually, has described it as the human equivalent of the Internet of Things. Um, it's a term I heard a lot more a few years ago than now, but the whole concept that your house, your life will be wired, um, so that you can control everything from your room, the lights downstairs, the garage, I mean, we're seeing some of this right now. Um, but it's the wiring.

And that's what the autonomic nervous system is. It does, it's the wiring that takes care of the background life functions throughout, and so it, you know, I'm a cardiologist by training, our focus is on cardiovascular manifestations, heart rate and blood pressure regulation, but this Affects much more broadly, it affects breathing, it affects gut function, it affects bladder function, it affects sweating, you know, all the things that are really useful for living, like if one of those things don't work, you know, life becomes very difficult and sometimes unsustainable, but things you don't want to have to think about to do, right? I mean, there's certainly fables in mythology where people have to think to breathe, for example, and that doesn't go well. So that's what the Autonomic Nervous System is, and Dysautonomia or Autonomic Dysfunction is saying there's something wrong with it. Now the problem with Dysautonomia as a label, or as a diagnosis, is that, A, it's hard to disprove, right?

It's hard to say there's nothing wrong with any of those things, because we can test for some of those things, and many of the things don't have brilliant tests, ways to sort of say yay or nay. But the other is, things can be true and unhelpful. So, for example, when I was at Vanderbilt, And to some extent now, you know, but when I was at Vanderbilt, my clinic, my autonomic clinic, was in a building that we call the Vanderbilt Heart and Vascular Institute. And it's probably true that every patient that was seen in that clinic could be said to have heart and vascular or heart or vascular disease. We'll shorten it to heart disease.

But if we gave that every patient the diagnosis of heart disease while technically correct, it's totally unhelpful. Because, you know, we know that, you know, within the spectrum of heart disease, you could have a myocardial infarction, or what's commonly called a heart attack, and that has its own set of risks and treatments and prognosis. You could have heart rhythm problems, and even heart rhythm problems isn't a thing. You have atrial rhythm problems, ventricular rhythm problems, different types that have different prognoses. You could have valve problems, and these all have different natural histories, different courses, different treatments.

And so, just labeling, if someone just comes with a label of I have heart disease, that doesn't really help communicate what the issues are, what's likely to happen to them, or even what treatments might be helpful to them. So, it means that something's not quite right. You know, and I think we need to get a bit more specific. So, certainly in the spectrum, we have traditionally seen patients, um, with, say, late stage diabetes as a complication, or with Parkinson's disease, for example, older patients that can get profound orthostatic hypotension because some of these autonomic nerves, in particular ones in the sympathetic nervous system, are shot, and so they're not able to Squished vessels properly and they're not able to maintain their blood pressure. That's a, you know, sort of at one end of the spectrum, but there can be problems with Regulation issues, problems with the reflexes that help control the heart rate and blood pressure regulation in response to different stresses, um, that, and those are more common, I think, in certainly the younger populations, right, so patients under the age of 60 or 70 years old, and certainly in, in patients with, you know, Ehlers Danlos Syndrome, uh, joint hypermobility, sort of things in the spectrum.

One of the more common Specific manifestations that I see is, is an overlap with POTS, or Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome. Certainly patients can be prone to, um, issues of orthostatic intolerance where they feel unwell when they're vertical, when they're upright. Um, and maybe not fully have the, you know, the excessive tachycardia to meet the criteria for POTS. So that's the thing, it's not, you know, we, we define criteria with, with, uh, you know, absolute, you have to, you know, Meet A, B, and C, um, and that's helpful because if you want to try and start understanding why things are, you need a group that is somewhat vaguely homogenous, um, but that doesn't mean that everyone, you know, that just falls short of the criteria doesn't have something along that spectrum and and may still benefit from some of the treatments that we learn about. I'm really glad that you brought up orthostatic intolerance and, and POTS, but we're going to obviously talk about POTS a lot.

If somebody has orthostatic intolerance, but they don't meet the criteria for POTS, I honestly keep trying to figure out what the correct ICD 10 code is for that. Do you happen to know offhand? So, I'll say two things, and the short answer is that there's not a great answer, um, but the longer answer is, uh, even outside of ICD 10 codes, there actually wasn't a term for it until a few years ago. And so one of the challenges is that if someone, if a physician were being strict about the criteria and someone came in and they Didn't quite meet the criteria for POTS. They would say, you don't meet the criteria for POTS and what they might be saying is, you know, yes, you have something, it's just doesn't meet these criteria, but I think a lot of times what the patient hears is, it's another doctor telling me there's nothing wrong with me, right?

And so there's a challenge between what was said and what was heard, even if everything was correct. And so sometimes what would happen is physicians would diagnose people with POTS anyway, and that gets confusing because now the label is communicating something to other people, including other physicians, that may not be correct and that adds confusion. And so a few years ago, um, the Canadian Cardiovascular Society, you know, we had put out a statement on orthostatic intolerance, and originally it was supposed to be sort of a, you know, focused on POTS. And as we were sort of discussing it and trying to figure out The what to do, what was clear is that everyone on the writing committee had confronted this issue of, you know, you know, people being misdiagnosed and and also the communication issue of, you know, wanting to acknowledge that there was something even if it wasn't meeting the criteria for POTS. And so we came up with, uh, you know, an ecosystem, I guess, of other diagnoses to try and both, uh, address this issue of don't quite meet the heart rate criteria, but have symptoms.

And also address the issue of the people that do meet the criteria or don't if they have significant other comorbidities outside of orthostatic intolerance. Their prognosis in response to treatments for orthostatic intolerance may be different, right? So, if you have major GI issues, um, and we treat the orthostatic intolerance well, well, if you sort of try and track quality of life and say, Hey, how well did my treatment work? The quality of life may not improve a lot if their main problem is actually their gut, you know, and you've treated the orthostatic intolerance. And so, we came up with a nomenclature to try and convey that as well.

But the term that we came up with for patients with A lot of orthostatic intolerance symptoms, but not enough heart rate is postural symptoms without tachycardia. Um, and I grant you, it, it really, you know, needs marketing, right? We, that wasn't really a roll off the tongue sort of phrase. And we acknowledged, actually, that this was a first effort at trying to describe this group to acknowledge that clearly something, right? It's not that we don't believe the patients, but it's without the tachycardia criteria, and so we're certainly open to better names.

But, but I think that concept is important that. There can be something there without that tachycardia. Yeah, I think it's really important and I think you hit the nail on the head. I have, I definitely have had patients that have gone to some different places and I'm thinking of one particular patient that was diagnosed with POTS and then went back to this center and had the tilt table test again and they told her, you no longer have POTS and her symptoms were no different. In fact, she was, you know, still really miserable and, and I explained and tell me if I'm wrong about this, but I was like, you know, that's a snapshot in time.

That's. That's how your cardiovascular and autonomic system was behaving on that particular day. So, you know, we, we also, I feel like it can be challenging because people probably vary a lot day to day as well. Yeah, there's absolutely, there's, there's day to day variability. There's time of day variability.

I mean, there's, we published a couple of papers, well, we published a paper and there's another. Abstract that's being presented next week at the American Autonomic Society meeting with data from, um, our autonomic lab where we've, we know that there's time of day variability, right? That in the morning, uh, first thing, the standing heart rates are a bit higher. Um, the, the supine or the lying heart rates are not. And so the orthostatic tachycardia, the difference.

Tends to be higher in the morning and that decreases by late morning and certainly into the afternoon. So if you assess first thing in the morning that, you know, that's worth a few beats a minute compared to if your clinic's in the afternoon. Now what I would say about your, your patient situation, one of the questions is Um, what was the diagnosis of POTS based upon? Right, so if it was a we took your history and we think this sounds like POTS and let's get the test, the patient may not have met the criteria for POTS yet to begin with. It was more, you know, we think that this should be looked into.

Um, versus we did orthostatic vital signs in clinic and, and I want to be clear, orthostatic, you know, a tilt is not an absolute necessity for POTS diagnosis in everyone. A good lying and 10 minute standing test You know, if you shoot over the, the, the bar of heart rate, if you will, that's good enough, um, but one of the other abstracts we're presenting is a more detailed comparison again of tilting versus standing in the same cohort of patients, and it's worth a few beats a minute, right, so if someone, if someone on a stand test, their heart rate goes up only, say, 10 or 15 beats a minute, it's very unlikely that they're The next day, you know, they come back in a few weeks for a tilt, that unless something fundamentally has changed in their physiology, that they're suddenly going to have an increase of 35 or 40 beats a minute, but if someone on a stand test is at 28 beats per minute increase, or 29, it's quite possible that You know, uh, because of some day to day variability, that on a different day, they may be just over that threshold. And obviously, lots of things affect this. Hydration status will affect it. Um, time for medications or, you know, medications in general will affect this.

So, I think we have to be a bit flexible about it. I, I certainly think if someone meets POTS criteria based on symptoms and heart rate and on a different day, on a different assessment, Especially if they're, uh, they've been engaging in some non pharmacological treatments, which we can get into, and their heart rate is just below that, I don't think the diagnosis disappears. But it does depend on how the diagnosis was made in the first place. Yeah, no, the diagnosis was definitely made based on the clinical picture and then doing a tilt table test and then upon return to the same center, still having the same clinical picture and I wasn't there, you know, when they had this conversation. So, like you said, there's sometimes things that we say that are said one way, but heard another way.

So that's, that's definitely another challenge that we face. I want to make sure that we talk about like causes of POTS because I think that's. At least it's my understanding that there are different ways that people can get to this final common pathway of postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome or POTS. Are there multiple different causes of POTS? I think so.

Right? I mean, one of the challenges is that in most people, it's hard to determine the exact cause. We have sort of inferences. Um, but I think most people that treat a lot of patients would argue that it's not one very specific thing, but heterogeneous. Yes.

Mixture of different pathophysiologic mechanisms, right? So in, you know, there are two sisters, twin sisters that, um, have a genetic mutation in a norepinephrine transporter gene that causes their POTS. Those are perhaps the only two people where I can be 100 percent sure that we know what caused their POTS. Um, in most people it's, it's tougher, but, you know, post viral seems to be a common, um, descriptor. So, you know, we've done.

Uh, a study that we've often colloquially referred to as the big pot survey, it's, it's a ethics approved study out of Vanderbilt, something that I started, uh, shortly before I left there and it's still ongoing, it's been done in partnership with Dysautonomy International, um, and distributed largely through the social media platforms of Dysautonomy International, and right now we've had, uh, well over 10, 000 patients Touch it. So, you know, it has challenges, right? We don't know who the patients are necessarily. We're taking their word for everything they tell us because it's not, you know, something we verified in clinic. But it has strengths as well.

And the main strength is it's much more democratic. Uh, in many ways then, you know, data we collected at Vanderbilt or data that my colleagues at Mayo would collect at Mayo, because obviously not everyone can get to Mayo or get to Vanderbilt. There are a lot of barriers and challenges depending on where you live and your insurance and things like that. You know, so in that, when we looked, and this was actually, we probably looked when there were about 5, 000 people, it was a few, it was the first paper, we actually looked at sort of what people said about, you know, What happened? So one of the questions was, in the three months before the onset of your symptoms, did something happen?

And we had a laundry list of things that they could choose, and the most common answer was no. Which isn't to say nothing happened, it's nothing that jumped out at them as being unusual happened. Um, but of the people that said yes, 40 percent reported a viral illness. In the three months before the onset. And, you know, I think some more dramatic than others.

I mean, I still remember one patient early in my time at Vanderbilt that insisted she could tell me almost to the minute when she developed her POTS because she was at a picnic and she was feeling well and all of a sudden sort of just became really ill and was never the same since, right, to the minute she'd say that. And so I suspect that even pre COVID, this was a dominant cause of, of, of, of This type of illness. But certainly there are, you know, other triggers, you know, people have found different bits of, um, pathology in different cohorts, not necessarily everyone, so some people have had issues with, um, peripheral neuropathies, um, so there was a very elegant and hard to, you know, do study published in the late 90s, um, by Gersh Jacob and colleagues, uh, you know, out of Vanderbilt before I was there. Where they actually used, uh, segmental norepinephrine spillover techniques, so techniques to look at actually sympathetic nerve release of norepinephrine and they actually looked at different parts of the body as opposed to just the whole body and showed that in some of the POTS patients there seemed to be less release Of this neurotransmitter from the sympathetic nerves in the legs, suggesting that, you know, there may be less sympathetic squish of the legs, and that may be part of the problem, um, and so that, you know, I think is the basis of what's often referred to as neuropathic pods, um, you know, there's some people that, uh, And I think it's a fairly small group that they just release a lot of sympathetic, their sympathetic nerves fire like crazy, like their brainstem is just causing it to fire, right? And there's obviously a reason somewhere, but not sort of an obvious, you know, reason that we can pick up.

Some of the work we did at Vanderbilt was really focused on blood volume and blood volume regulation, and we found that a majority of patients, when we formally assessed their blood volume, seemed to have a low blood volume, right? And that's actually the basis of some of the treatments. That we use, but one of the consequences of that is that that actually secondarily increases sympathetic tone as a response mechanism, um, and that can contribute. So there are different sort of physiologic mechanisms or pathophysiologic mechanisms. I think the challenge is That it's tough often, um, well, the challenge is some people want to say I have this type of POTS or that type of POTS, but the truth is these mechanisms overlap in the same individual, right, so I'm a big fan of Venn diagrams, right, people sort of think of these as discrete things, they're actually a series of overlapping Venn diagrams, but they're features, and, you know, these are features that if you can sort of Figure out your patient has this feature or that feature.

There may be treatments that you'd be more likely to use that may be helpful. Although that's largely clinical experience based and not, you know, we don't have trials on, you know, you have this feature so we're going to test this drug. That may be where we want to go, but we're a little, you know, we need some more basic trials on, you know, we have drugs that'll help, right? We're starting to get there. We're starting to see some initial treatment trials, but we're obviously way behind Things like myocardial infarction or stroke in terms of hypertension, in terms of having big trials, good data to say this works.

And what about structural causes? When I was doing some reading, I came across some conversations, a couple of papers about problems with pelvic veins, upper cervical instability. Do you think there are structural causes of POTS? Probably. Right.

I mean, so I think there's increasing interest in sort of venous structure. So, you know, I, one of the, the person that put me on to that years ago was a guy named Peter Rowe, who's a pediatrician at Johns Hopkins, who's been in the chronic fatigue syndrome space, ME CFS space for a year. 30 years. And he and his colleagues have sort of found some patients with what he described as, you know, pelvic veins that look like Medusa's, Medusa's head, right, they're just all over the place and, and that certainly can lead to a lot more venous pooling there. And, and, you know, there's a small case series that embolization where you get rid of some of these sort of excess and ectatic veins helps.

The truth is, I'm not entirely sure how common that is. That is, I mean, I've, I've, I've done this a few times and looked and we've actually embolized, you know, on a couple of occasions and, you know, in, in the patient I remember the best, you know, actually some of the pelvic pain that she had, Improved for orthostatic intolerance didn't improve that much, right? But there's probably, again, a spectrum in terms of, um, you know, uh, you know, what gets better and how much it gets better. Um, it's certainly worth thinking about, right? It's worth noting that, you know, not insignificant number of patients that I see, um, you know, have a diagnosis of endometriosis and the possibilities are that's absolutely true, right?

I mean, people, you know, these are young women typically is our patient population and they certainly. Do you get endometriosis? Um, but the other possibility is that the pain, you know, that's attributed to endometriosis could be from pelvic congestion and You know, the importance is that there's potentially a different treatment. Um, more recently, there's been more interest in, in things like May Therner syndrome, um, where you can get sort of venous compression on one side. And again, I'm not sure I fully understand exactly what happens, right?

So, I think when it was initially presented to me, it was like, well, you know, you have not enough blood coming back because you have venous obstruction, but, you know, I, uh, Heard a recent talk from Peter Rowe and, you know, one of the other things that may contribute is that may actually contribute to the ectatic veins because you develop collaterals to deal with the venous obstruction and that may be part of the problem. Um, and then certainly in the pediatric group, you know, you, uh, they, they will talk a lot about median arcuate ligament syndrome or MALS, um, which involves, you know, sort of further up in the gut. Uh, sort of a compression, again, how much that's a venous issue versus, uh, you know, a nerve, like a, the ganglia itself is getting whacked by the vessels and nerve damage and, you know, it's less clear, because obviously if it's a nerve damage whacked by the vessels, that's less likely to be responsive to things that, you know, alter the flow issue, right? You can sort of decompress the vessel part a little bit, but, you know, it's not clear that things get better. I will say that I've I've seen that a lot less, and maybe I'm not looking for it properly, but I, just in general, in the adult world, we don't seem to talk about that as much as in the pediatric autonomic world, and I'm not sure if that's a, you know, growth issue, that these are more critical issues, you know, at certain stages, um, you know, or they present at an earlier stage, you know, than, than, uh, than when you're full grown.

But, so, they're in the structure of things like that. Craniocervical instability is another interesting issue, and it's one that's obviously important in the hypermobile world. And there's no doubt that, you know, that some people can have bones that slide, right? I mean, I've certainly seen sort of, you know, x ray images saying, well, it's bending more than it should. Where the data is less clear is on exactly, you know, on is that contributing to, like, what, I guess, taking a step back, what symptoms is that contributing to?

Right, so, is that contributing to autonomic symptoms? Should there be other nervous symptoms if you're actually having significant compression issues? And the most important question is, if you were to try and go in and stabilize it, does that improve the symptoms? Right, because obviously, you know, fixing craniocervical instability, this is, now we're talking neurosurgery. We're not, uh, it's not a trivial matter.

And that's where I think right now, certainly the data is lacking. It's certainly an area of interest. I would argue that, you know, people are certainly doing it. widespread, but there's some neurosurgeons doing it. I think it's critical, uh, that, you know, things like this are being done, that it be done in the context of research studies or at minimum registries, if not something a little more enhanced where we can get follow up information to try and figure out what gets better.

Does anything get better? And hopefully the answer is yes. But if the answer is yes, what gets better? So if you have, um, you know, paresthesias, does that get better? Does your heart rate regulation get better?

Does, you know, what is it that is improving? And that's, for me, the challenge in terms of saying, oh yes, you should go and try and get this You know, stabilized. It's fine to say that. Obviously, if it's so unstable that someone's concerned that it's going to slide and transect your spine, absolutely, then that's a clear neurosurgical indication, right? But the issues we're dealing with are usually more subtle.

It's not so much, it's, the patients clearly have a lot of symptoms. They have a bit of slidey, a bit of slideyness, you know, at the critical junction. The question is, is one causing the other? And if we fix the one, will that help the other? Yeah, definitely.

And I We've discussed upper cervical instability a lot on the podcast, and I just, so people don't panic, there's a lot of people that have mild upper cervical instability, right, that can improve it through physical therapy and a variety of other techniques, but yes, if you're on that end of the spectrum where, you know, you need a surgical intervention, now exactly you're talking a much bigger procedure, and I agree with you 100%, I think that it would be I think a lot of the people that are doing those surgeries are tracking their outcomes, but something like a registry I think would be so beneficial to really be able to tell how beneficial or not these surgeries are and for individual symptoms because it is such a massive undertaking. So I think that would be very, very, very helpful. What about hyperadrenergic POTS? You know, you hear people talk about that a lot. I think there's maybe Different takes on that, but of course, that would also change the treatment approach if a person's blood pressure, for example, is high as compared to if it's on the lower end of things.

Yeah, um, so absolutely, so I will take a step back and just say I hate subtyping, right? As I mentioned earlier, because, you know, depending on how you define it, I think these can often overlap. So, I still remember one of my earlier American Autonomic Society meetings, and there was a session on POTS, and Um, the group out of Mayo and Rochester, which is a very highly productive research group, um, had two abstracts back to back. on POTS. One was in hyperadrenergic POTS, and the other was in neuropathic POTS, and when chatting with, you know, the, the people that presented the abstract afterwards, there were some patients that were in both studies, right?

Because they were, I mean, they were perfectly honest. What they, they, that may have been the headline in hyperadrenergic POTS or neuropathic POTS as a shorthand, but, you know, they described Who they studied, and the criteria were based on, you know, certain specific test results, right? So they defined hyper adrenergic POTS, however, they did it probably based on standing norepinephrine levels, and maybe based on blood pressure response from lying to standing some orthostatic hypertension, I forget the details. Neuropathic POTS was probably based on abnormal sweat testing, you know, which is mediated by the sympathetic, peripheral sympathetic nerves, right? So, you know, what they did was perfectly honest, but when you look at the, what it points out though is, is that these aren't Mutually exclusive terms, right?

So, I, but I do think that, you know, you know, the features are important and can guide treatment. But the challenge, again, with these terms is that there's not a generally accepted definition of what that means. Right, so, for example, if we say orthostatic hypotension, right, the definition of orthostatic hypotension is a drop in your systolic, the top number of your blood pressure, by 20 mmHg, or a drop in the diastolic, or bottom number, by 10. There is a caveat that if you have a lot of baseline hypertension, that the threshold Rises to 30 over 15 millimeters of mercury. But in orthostatic hypertension, if you were to look at different, no, sorry, in hyperadrenergic pods, for the definition, if you look at different papers, everyone uses a slightly different way of deciding that they're there.

Um, so, some people will focus on plasma norepinephrine levels on standing. So, norepinephrine is the neurotransmitter in the sympathetic nervous system. If you make several assumptions, you know, it's, A biochemical marker, right? You can actually, you know, you can sort of infer that the increase in norepinephrine probably reflects in some way the increase in the norepinephrine released into the synapses. There are assumptions about clearance, and the most important assumption is that someone didn't have a vasovagal reaction when they were standing up, because if you have a vasovagal reaction, then your adrenal gland just sends out a pool of norepinephrine or noradrenaline and epinephrine So, you're looking for, you know, ripples in the wave, and a tsunami sort of comes through, and then you can't really interpret the ripples, right?

But, assuming that doesn't happen, it's a biochemical marker, and we can use that. So, some people use that. At Vanderbilt, we use that a lot to find these groups. Um, other people say, well, focus on the blood pressure, right? So, if the blood pressure goes up more than 10 mmHg from lying to standing, so instead of the blood pressure dropping when you stand up, it actually goes up when you stand up, that that's a marker of.

Hyperadrenergic state. Some people say it should be 20 millimeters. So one of the challenges right now is we don't actually have an accepted, widely accepted criteria. So when someone says this is hyperadrenergic, we say this is exactly what it means. Um, and we may be getting to that.

Having said that, in clinic, there are some people I do think are very clearly hyperadrenergic where it's severe enough that I would actually try and treat that or target that directly with central sympatholytic drugs. So drugs that work at the brain or brainstem level to decrease sympathetic outflow and I want to be clear, this is a minority, this is a fairly small minority of my patients and the reason it's a minority is that these drugs Have all been on the market forever, right? They all started life as antihypertensive agents, and they're hardly used now. Mainly because they're much better antihypertensive drugs. They're drugs that are better tolerated.

These drugs all have some, you know, they're clunky, right? They all, they're, they're brute force instruments. They work mechanistically a specific targeted way, which is why we want to use them, but they're clunky drugs. And if I give it to the wrong patient, or if I give too much to the, you know, even the right patient, they'll feel miserable. Um, because they're central, they work at the brainstem level, they're central to presence.

I can flatten someone out like a pancake, right, if I give too much, right? So, you have to be very judicious or cautious in who you think you're giving it to. Um, what I've come up with, and this is largely, actually entirely unpublished in terms of the approach that I used for this, but we're actually trying to put together a small case series now, is, um, there's some key features that I found will cluster together and seems to identify people that Respond. And one of them is patients that wake up at night with their heart racing, right? So fundamentally, the P and the O in POTS is postural and orthostatic, right?

These are people that usually have their heart rates jump up when they're vertical, um, and certainly when they're exerting themselves and doing things, right, but if they're asleep, none of those things should really be true, um, but yet there are people, it's not the majority, but there are people definitely that will say that, you know, they go to bed and a few hours later they wake up and, and not that they wake up to go to the bathroom and then They start thinking about things and their heart races, but they wake up and their heart is racing. Like that, either that caused it or that's coincident with it. Um, so that's one feature. The other feature that a lot of these people will have is that they'll describe a hair trigger temper. So they'll often couch it by saying, No, I'm really a nice person, but You know, I, you know, things will just set me off, um, and often their partner or, you know, other family member will verify, yeah, you know, things, you know, they'll get set off fairly easily.

Um, and then some of the people will actually just describe feeling, feeling revved up all the time. Like, they just, you know, they just can't seem to sort of get calm, um, and obviously many of these people, not surprisingly, have been, you know, diagnosed or treated for anxiety, you know, with or without success, but based on some of these symptoms, and so, all of those, in my mind, are consistent with something You know, not peripheral, like they're not doing stuff, right, but something that, you know, just, you know, rapidly increases their sympathetic tone. And so, my go to drug for that, if I hear that consolation after warning patients that this could make you feel horrible, um, is methyldopa. Right, so this is a very old school antihypertensive drug. It's still a correct internal medicine board exam answer for drugs you can safely give pregnant women with hypertension, but in most centers it's not very commonly used anymore.

There are other kinder, gentler drugs, and in fact, you know, many of my U. S. colleagues are telling me they're having trouble getting it now, and so they've sort of switched to other central sympatholytics. Um, you know, the key with methodopa is, you know, it's, it's, it's blunt, and I started at a low dose, I started at night, because fatigue is a main side effect, and if you're gonna Be tired better at night than during the day. Um, and then, you know, we start low and then we sometimes have to titrate up at night.

And sometimes we only need to use it at night. It just, by settling things down at night and they sleep better, that helps enough during the day. But then I have other patients that say, well, yeah, that's great, but, you know, at some point in the morning, they'll tell me a very specific time. That my symptoms come back with a vengeance, and that's usually a trigger that they need another daily dose, right, it's a, it's a, but it's typically a BID drug, TID, um, but it's a twice a day drug, so you don't expect the bedtime dose to work all day and night, sometimes night's enough, but it's, you know, I, We'll always tell people, this is the Marmite of drugs. Um, you know what Marmite is?

My wife is British, and so this, it's a yeast based, savoury spread. Um, that's popular in England. There's a cousin of it in Australia called Vegemite that is a little bit different. Ah, yes, I have heard of it. Um, but Marmite, you know, it's actually a very interesting, um, interesting thing.

Their entire ad campaign for several years Is entirely based on the fact that lots of people hate it, right? Like that it's a niche thing and the punchline is you either love it or you hate it. So, for example, I was giving a talk last week and I was trying to pull in a little, you know, ad, like a little video thing into my talk and, you know, the one that my wife told me not to use was of a, A woman who was breastfeeding a baby and, you know, a toast had popped up and she pulled it on a plate and then she had a little squeezy marmite, so it was actually advertising the squeezy bottles, you know, so with one hand she could put the marmite on and she took a bite and all of a sudden the baby stopped feeding, pulled away, looked at her and then projectile vomited at her for about 10 seconds. Oh no! And remember, these are the people trying to sell you Marmite that are putting this ad on, right?

But, but, the whole point is that I, Methyl Dopamine, I think most of the central sympatholytic drugs are like this. The people that respond to this, I've had more people tell me that this is the best drug they've ever been on for anything. But, if you're not in that right group, you will hate it. So that's, that's the challenge, is you have to, so this is where, you know, There's a lot of things we do generically for POTS, but this is one of those more subtle, you know, personalized, characteristic things, and it's not based on the label of hyperadrenergic POTS or H POTS, but it's based on specific characteristics that do seem to predict response to treatment. Now, let me say, everything I've said over the last several minutes has no objective purpose.

You know, trial data, right? This is a clinical experience thing and, and at some point, you know, we probably would want to study this, but this gets into sort of the difficulties of arranging studies in, you know, subtypes of, uh, you know, disorders where the initial studies are difficult to begin with in the first place, but, but hopefully we'll get there. Yeah, no, that absolutely makes sense. We are going to take a quick break and when we come back, we are going to dig into, uh, one of the things I've been really dying to ask you about is, I think I've heard you say that people with POTS feel faint, but people with POTS usually don't faint. And uh, I, I want to ask you about vasovagal syncope or neurocardiogenic syncope.

I know they're not the same thing, but I want to, we want to talk about that. And we're of course going to talk more about treatment options. So we'll be right back. This episode of the Bendy Bodies podcast is brought to you by EDS Guardians, paying it forward in the Ehlers Danlos Syndrome community, patient to patient for the common good. I am proud to serve on the inaugural board of directors for EDS Guardians, a small charity with a big mission and a big heart.

Now seeking donors, volunteers, and partners. Patient advocacy and support programs available now. Travel grants launching in 2025. Learn more, shop for a cause at their swag store, and join the revolution at edsguardians. org.

Thank you so much for listening to Bendy Bodies. We really appreciate your support. It really helps the podcast when you like, subscribe, and comment on YouTube, and follow, rate, and review on all audio platforms. This helps us reach so many more people and spread the information to everyone. Thank you so much again and enjoy the rest of the episode.

This is your podcast, so I want it to be as helpful as possible. In the description of this podcast is a link to a survey to collect your feedback. If you contribute, you will be eligible to receive an appreciation gift. We will be selecting one lucky person for a bronze educoaching session valued at 275. Please see the link for details.

Okay, we are back with Dr. Raj talking about POTS and other forms of dysautonomia and I believe that I've heard you say this at a conference but I just want to clarify about if people with POTS feel faint or if they do faint or if they can do both. What are your thoughts on that? So I think that the point that I've tried to make at several meetings is that POTS is fundamentally not a fainting disorder. It's fundamentally a feeling pain disorder.

And so one of The things that really drove this home is one of my first studies at Vanderbilt, we were looking at blood volume regulation, but also like fluid shifting in response to tilts, so we were doing 30 minute tilts, and we had a cohort of patients with POTS, and we had healthy controls, you know, Vanderbilt grad students at the time, um, and You know, the POTS patients, and we had a symptom rating. Every few minutes we'd ask a series of symptoms. That was actually the very origin of what eventually became the Vanderbilt Orthostatic Symptom Score. Um, to sort of track simply orthostatic symptoms. And so, one of the things that was interesting is that, you know, the healthy control subjects You know, they were pretty much asymptomatic.

Every once in a while, someone would get a little bit symptomatic, then they'd faint, and then, you know, be censored out of the data, and, and they'd who was largely asymptomatic again. In contrast, the POTS patients were symptomatic almost from the beginning, and they would tell you they were going to faint, and they kept telling you for almost 30 minutes. When we looked at the data, actually a higher percentage of the healthy control subjects were lost, or did not survive the 30 minute tilt than the POTS patients. So more POTS patients made it through the 30 minute tilt, even though they felt miserable. That whole time.

So that's the point I'm making is that it's a mistake to think about POTS as a fainting disorder. Having said that, probably about 20, 20, 30, depending on the series you're looking at of POTS patients will faint and the mechanism is usually a reflex faint or vasovagal syncope. So, you know, does fainting mean you don't have POTS? Well, the fainting wasn't from the POTS necessarily. It gets a little more complicated because one can actually contribute to the other, I think.

But some POTS patients will faint, but most don't. And I want to clarify, what I, what I think you were saying is that, that if the control subject fainted, then you remove their data, when you say they didn't survive, you don't mean that they died. They didn't survive the tilt, so they, you know, they didn't make it through the 30 minutes of tilt, right? Everyone, I promise you, everyone was alive at the end of the 30 minutes. Yeah, at the end of the study, just in case there was one person who heard that differently.

I just wanted to make sure to clarify till table tests do not kill people. Yeah. Although, although I, I, I imagine that they're, they're pretty miserable, especially for 30 minutes, if you feel like you're going to faint, you know, for, for that long. Yeah, that's definitely tough. I want to make sure that we spend plenty of time on treatment options, so we're going to come down to that next.

You mentioned Methyl Dopa, which I think was really valuable, how you were sharing how you might start with QHS or evening. Dosing and that you may or may not add in daytime dosing and you were mentioning specifically that you, you know, start low. Um, are you able to share a number for like the average size, you know, patient how low you would start usually? Methyldopa, every patient actually, um, that I started on gets 125 milligrams. Okay, at bedtime, which is, you know, either one pill or half a pill depending on, on how your pills are constructed.

Mm hmm. Um, so it's a pretty low dose, uh, and, you know, in theory, you can actually go down to half of that if you don't tolerate it, but usually the problem is that that's not enough. But I'd rather start at the not enough and go up than just whack people with so much that they feel miserable for a different reason. Sure, and could that, uh, waking up with the racing heart rate, could that be caused by sleep apnea? So, um, less likely sleep apnea, um, in fact, you know, we have, when I was at Vanderbilt, we actually were, did a series of studies trying to understand the sleep issues in POTS and starting with questionnaires where lots of people describe sleep problems, we did actigraphy based studies.

Um, where, you know, clearly their sleep wasn't as good, and, and in a cohort, I think it was 18 or 19 people, we actually put them through formal sleep studies. And, I think one person had some apnea, Most of what we saw was insomnia, and, and this is something that, uh, you know, not a sleep person, and I hadn't thought about it, but there are actually two types of insomnia. There's the, I can't get to sleep, and then there's the, I wake up after several hours and I can't get back to sleep. Um, and some patients have one or the other and some have both, but that's actually the main problem. Um, there may be restless leg, you know, syndrome that's seen in some of the folks as well, and that, you know, has some treatment approaches, but the challenge is understanding, you know, the, you know, the cause of this insomnia.

So, to the sleep apnea point, right, if you have obstructive sleep apnea, you know, absolutely, I recommend using CPAP and other treatments for it, and if that helps, that's great. Um, I actually used to wonder whether this was related to sort of a REM cycle and You know, certainly in older patients, um, with some of the neurogenic disorders, so patients with multiple system atrophy, very different demographic than, you know, the audience, I suspect, you know, they can get something called a REM sleep behavioral disorder, where they actually, you know, during REM sleep, where your brain is Going crazy, but it's supposed to be paralyzed, and things are supposed to be quiescent. Sometimes, you know, there's a breakdown in the quiescence. Um, and so some people can actually sort of, you know, have very vivid dreams, act out in their dreams, you know, sometimes physically hit. They're partners, not intentionally, and they're like, they are asleep, but they're sort of just flailing and doing things, and, um, but we also see, you know, sympathetic tone can increase with that, right?

So, the heart rates and the blood pressures can, can change, and, you know, maybe that's still it, but I used to think that that was the primary thing, and it was a sleep problem, and it might be, but we've taken a more pragmatic approach of of trying to target the sympathetic tone, and that seems to help other things as well. So let's talk about, uh, some other treatment options. So let's say that, uh, there are some physicians that listen to this podcast. And so let's say that an internal medicine physician is listening to this podcast. And of course, with COVID, we know that there are more people, uh, now with POTS than there have been before.

And let's say that this internal medicine physician wants to help treat this patient's POTS. Can you go through kind of like the, Different steps of treatment options that you would approach in that kind of a patient. So, the foundation of treatment is non pharmacological and then we layer on pharmacological therapies on top of that. It's really a this or that situation. Usually it's a this and that situation.

Our non pharmacological treatments are largely based on on the, what we think is the underlying problem. And in most people, the heart rate is a response. One of the common features that has been seen by different groups, Mayo's reported it, UT Southwestern's reported it, we've had data at Vanderbilt and now in Calgary, um, and it's been reported in other disorders as well, the patients seem to have a low stroke volume, right? So, for the patients out there, basically, a stroke volume is a way, a fancy way of saying, every time your heart beats, a certain amount of blood circulates. Leaves, right?

It, it pumps a certain amount of blood with every beat. Um, and then if you add that up for a whole minute, we call that cardiac output, right? But cardiac output is largely made up of stroke, volume and heart rate. So if you need more blood, you're trying to be more active, your muscles are requiring more blood in a minute. And your stroke volume is low and you can't increase it, the only way to increase it is by increasing the heart rate.

And so that's how these two things are related. And so we think that, uh, you know, we found that the stroke volume is low, when measured, in a different, many groups have found this repeatedly in POTS patient cohorts. And so the, part of the assumption has been, well, maybe that's the underlying issue and the heart rate is a response to that. Right, through the sympathetic nervous system. And so, strategies have been targeting, trying to improve that.

One of them is to try and improve the blood, increase the blood volume. Increase the amount of blood in the volume, the liquid part in particular. This was, as I mentioned, one of the interests that we had at Vanderbilt was actually blood volume in pots, and when we looked objectively to measure it, about 70 percent had a low blood volume, but this is a hard thing to be very precise about and measure, and certainly, it involves Generally speaking, nuclear medicine tests and it's not always easily accessible. It's common enough that we treat it. We try to treat it.

Non pharmacologically in everyone and we do that by trying to get people to hold on to more fluid So the first part of the strategy is drink more water I try and get all my patients to drink at least three liters of water per day Having said that almost all my patients can do this the ones that can't are in a minority of patients that have major gut issues that actually limits them. But most patients can do it, but you have to try. If you're doing it, if you're drinking when you're thirsty, you're not going to get there. And so the approach that I've taken is to actually try and, is to get patients to have a water bottle. Um, and, by a water bottle, I, I have, you know, I would analogize to NFL football teams, right?

There's a saying in football that if you have three quarterbacks, you don't have a quarterback. I don't want people to have a drawer full of water bottles and they can grab, like, you know, one each day. I want them to have a dedicated water bottle that they love. When there's a family portrait, I want, I want them in the picture, I want their family in the picture, and I want the water bottle in the picture because I want it to be a part of them. I want people to think that I have surgically sutured the bottle onto their hand because it's always there.

In fact, if they come to clinic and I ask them if they have a water bottle and they say yes, my next question is where is it? And if they say they left it in the car, that's a fail. Because I want that water bottle literally to be so important to them that they keep it with them all the time. If I go to see my doctor, I don't leave my glasses in the car, right? The glasses come with me.

I want the water bottle to have that same status, and with that, honestly, most of our patients can do it, and that's a floor, that's not an aspirational target. So, in the summer, when it's hot, when their requirements go up, that might go up from there. Right, but 3 litres is what I've said. And the other advantage of having one water bottle is, it has one size. And so you can figure out how much it takes, you can do the math once, use a calculator if needed, figure out how many of those bottles you need to get in through the day, and then you don't have to sit there and add up a little bit of this, and well this cup was a little smaller, and that must count for this, and it's, it's easier.

So, that's fine, you're going to pee out most of that water, but the idea is it's probably good for you, it flushes out the kidneys a bit, it allows your kidneys to hold on to whatever it wants to hold on to. One of the big predictors of what the kidney will hold on to is the sodium load. And so we want People to take in more sodium, so their kidneys hold on to more of the sodium, and the water will follow, and they'll retain the fluid. You know, the truth is, until fairly recently, there wasn't good data that it worked, even though this was sort of the advice doctors had given for a long time. But we actually did a study at Vanderbilt, this was sort of the last big study before I left.

That was NIH funded, where we actually brought patients in with POTS and healthy control subjects. These were all women of childbearing age, both, in both groups, into the research unit at Vanderbilt for seven days, twice. During one of the phases, we fed them a really low sodium diet. This was as little sodium as we could get in. We wanted to target 10 mL equivalents.

It turns out we can't guarantee that because that's so low that our assays for detection were a little bit higher than that. Right, but really, really low levels. And during the other phase, we put them on a high sodium, really high sodium diet. And for the better part of the 7 days, for 6 days, we did nothing besides let them eat. Because we wanted to get them into sodium balance.

And then, at the end, we analyzed a bunch of things. We looked at their blood volume. We formally measured blood volume in both phases. We looked at, um, we did the standing test, and we looked at the norepinephrine levels on standing. And of course, we looked at the heart rate response, the orthostatic tachycardia, and we tried to, you know, track symptoms.

And, what we found is that, Increasing the dietary salt intake did what we thought it would do, increase the plasma volume, the liquid part of blood. Now, we only did this for a week, the red cell volume didn't change, not surprisingly, but the blood volume increase was all because of the liquid part of blood. We noted that the norepinephrine level on standing, it decreased, it went from ridiculously high to just high. Right, it didn't normalize fully, it didn't look like the control subjects afterwards, but it improved a lot. And one of the important things about that is that I sometimes get told that oh, I don't think I should be doing that because I have hyperadrenergic POTS.

I don't love the labels, but these norepinephrine levels were high enough that, you know, in some studies, these people would be considered hyperadrenergic POTS. And they improved. Right, their norepinephrine went down when we gave them salt, it didn't go up. Right, so, that happened. And the orthostatic tachycardia, the heart rate increase, it decreased as well, so it didn't go up quite as much.

Again, we didn't normalize people, there's more to it than blood volume and salts, right, but we made them better. And the symptoms seemed to improve as well. Right, so, it seemed to work. So, from a practical point of view, if you use a combination of the heart rhythm society, Position statement on POTS from 2015 and the Canadian Cardiovascular Society. About 10 grams is recommended.

The truth is, we don't have great data on the exact amount, but 10 grams sort of is in the range of what people are recommending. And so, the challenge for us is, is how do you figure out what 10 grams is, right? I I can't figure out myself how to sit there and add up all the little bits of sodium and salt that, you know, that I'm eating and saying, okay, this is how much you're taking in, and so, I can't teach my patients to do it if I can't do it, and so I don't. The approach I take is to say, okay, a teaspoon of salt. is about 5 grams.

And so, basically what we're trying to get you to do is take an extra 2 teaspoons of salt a day. And so, you could take it all at once and just chomp on it, but that's really the hard way to do it. So don't typically recommend that. What I ask people to do is to take a couple of teaspoons of salt and put it into a container, a Ziploc bag, Glad bag, Ziploc won't give me any sponsorship, so use a Glad bag. In some container, doesn't matter what it is, and then Instead of shaking salt on from whatever random source you have, add it from the bag.

And that way, you know, you roughly know how much you're getting in. Someone could argue, well, you know, how big a teaspoon, because while a teaspoon is a formal measurement, most of us use whatever we have in the kitchen. And the truth is, it doesn't really matter. I think this is a horseshoes and hand grenades sort of thing. Like, if you're close, we want to get you close, right?

You don't have to be really, really precise about this. And the whole idea is, get the sodium in, pull in the fluid. You know, this amount of sodium, it doesn't typically affect the plasma sodium that much. It may go up by a point or two, but I've never seen someone get hypernatremia from this, because the whole idea is that you're trying to bring the fluid in with it, so the concentration shouldn't change too much. That's the goal.

And if someone does this properly, and they were on a low sodium diet to begin with, Then, they will retain fluid, and we want that in the bloodstream, but it's not just in the bloodstream, it's throughout their body, so they may actually feel a little bit of tissue edema, and that's actually, you know, may not be a pleasant thing, but it's a good thing, and they may gain a little weight, and by a little weight, I mean a few pounds, not 20 pounds, right, but water, if you retain a liter of water, that's That's a kilogram, that's a couple of pounds. So all that is sort of par for what we're trying to get done here, right? And the truth is I'm very prescriptive about how I get people to take their salt and water in, but I've had many patients come back and tell me with sometimes surprise how noticeable they feel better with that. And the thing is, everyone I see has probably been told to take salt and water, more salt and water, but then when I tell it to them in this more prescriptive way, they still notice a benefit, right? So how you do it And the practical do it this way actually can make a difference as opposed to just try and do better.

Right, telling people to do better, people aren't trying to do badly, just saying do better doesn't help unless you give them a practical strategy. So that's all about increasing the blood volume, filling up the tank more and hoping more blood gets back to the heart. But the next part of the issue is that our patients typically, with the exception of those with tachycardia at night, typically aren't that symptomatic with their lightheadedness or palpitation when they're lying down, it's when they're standing up. Right, so what happens when we stand up is the fluid shifts. Fluid that sits in the chest where your heart is, some of it shifts down to below your chest where your heart isn't.

That's, you know, probably a big contributor to the low stroke volume. Or certainly the drops in stroke volume, because obviously the heart can't pump out blood that doesn't come in. So, the strategy is to get more of that blood, less of that blood shifting, if you will. And that's where compression garments come in. And I've had a graduate student who's now graduated, she's now a medical student, named Kate Bourne, who's done some excellent studies looking at compression in POTS and her first set of studies published a few years ago now in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology was in our research lab where we got this neoprene and Velcro segmental compression suit and we brought in patients and we tilted them four times in one morning, four ten minute tilts.

So these were heroic patients to put up with that over and over again. And in each one, we had a different compression configuration. So the extremes were no compression versus full lower body compression. Abdomen, thighs, legs. And what we found was that there was a Beautiful dose response.

Full compression actually blunted the heart rate increase on tilt, 10 minute tilt, and improved symptoms, compared to no compression. And abdominal compression was almost as good as full compression, and calf compression was almost as useless as no compression. Right, so when people say get compression garments, the mistake The gap is, I think the doctors say, compression garments, and patients go and get DBT socks, and they say, well, you know, I've had a few patients say they think it helps, most say it did nothing, but that's because that's not where the fluid goes, so there's some very elegant studies using segmental bioelectrical impedance to look at fluid shifts based on changes in resistance Tilt people up or stand them up and, um, probably about 70 percent of the fluid actually is in your abdomen and pelvis. In those with pelvic congestion, probably more, right? That's because that's the whole issue is the fluid all sits there.

In about, you know, little under 20 percent actually is probably in your thighs and a little under 10 percent is in your calves. So, the problem is you're squishing in the wrong place. Right, it's the old story about, you know, the bank robber asked, why do you rob, why do you rob banks? That's where the money is, right? If you're squishing, the squishing may be effective, but if there's nothing to squish out of there, it's not going to ultimately help.

And so, we actually recommend ideally full on tights, high waisted tights. So you want to get that whole area compressed. Now, I used to prescribe a lot of tights, compression tights. Medical grade tights. What I tell people to do is to go to a sporting goods store and purchase high end athletic wear like triathlon tights or high end runner stockings.

So the con is that it's not as tight. So maybe not as effective as it could be if we squished more. But the trade off of that is that they're also more comfortable for that reason. And, you know, the added thing that I never considered earlier in my career is that they're more fashionable, right? So I am of a generation where when growing up tights were underwear, right?

My daughter disagrees, right? My daughter, you know, that's what she will wear is tights. And so if you're going to wear tights, You might as well wear something that's not butt ugly. And, and the truth is that my daughter is closer to the demographic of my POTS patients than I am. A lot of the POTS patients I see are, you know, teenagers, early 20s, early 30s, people that grew up wearing tights.

And so, the best tights in the world don't work if you don't wear them. Now, the challenge is that even in Calgary, where we're known for cold weather, my patients complain that in the summer they overheat, and they don't tolerate heat well, and so they have trouble with the tights. And so our backup plan, which until very recently is based on no evidence, has been to use body shaping garments like Spanx, or compression bicycle shorts, something like that. So again, if you're going to compress, you know, and you can't compress fully, target it to the area that's of most benefit, which is the abdomen and pelvis, and leave the legs, so you leave more skin exposed, so you can, you know, regulate your temperature better, and not overheat as much, but you still get some of the benefits of compression. Now, as I said, the data hasn't been there.

Kate had done follow up studies. During COVID actually, looking at commercial compression garments, so we designed a study where we actually sent monitors to people's homes with instructions on how to do orthostatic vital signs themselves at home and send us the data. And we did put the garments on in the morning, we did it before and after the garment in the morning, and before and after they took it off in the afternoon. And what we've shown is two things. One, that commercial tights, Lower the heart rate.

The upright heart rate is worse in the morning, but there's a significant effect, and it not only is it a significant effect, but it persists for hours. It works into the afternoon. And that paper has just been accepted for publication, actually, so that's going to be coming out in the next few weeks, that commercial garments work, not just the butt ugly garments that we used in the lab. Maybe more exciting is that we actually have a study that is just been submitted for publication looking at abdominal focus compression, so body shaping garments, um, you know, bicycle shorts, things like that, and that works too, not as effectively, the tights are a little better, right, but if you just look at does it work compared to, you know, when you take it off, the answer is yes, right, so, I mean, we actually have data now that these practical commercial wear is type garments can be helpful for our patients with POTS, in terms of heart rate response and in terms of symptoms. So, non pharmacological, we talked about salt, we talked about water, we talked about compression garments, and then the fourth non pharmacological issue is the toughest, and that's exercise.

You know, there is reasonably good data, right, not perfectly randomized controlled data, but data, and the best data is probably out of Dallas, that was published about 15 years ago, where they did a fairly large before and after study of patients With a three to six month exercise program in between for POTS patients. They measured almost everything before and after. It was a physiologically heroic study. And what they showed was that patients that went through the program, so everyone that completed the program, which in fairness is not the same as everyone that started it, but everyone that completed the program improved. Right, so they improved you, like they put in, they did cardiac MRIs, they put central venous catheters in to measure pressures.

They did micro neurography for nerve recordings of sympathetic traffic. You know, as a human physiology person, it was great, right, they measured all these great things. Most patients don't care about any of that. Right, but they did measure the orthostatic heart rate change, right, and that decreased. Patients care somewhat about that because that, they can sometimes measure themselves.

And they looked at The SF36, a generic quality of life scale, showed that, you know, everyone improved, now some a tiny bit and some a lot, right, so I don't want to make it sound like this is the cure all, right, but there was improvement, and the improvement largely related to the fact that the cardiac mass increased, so the stroke volume went up, right, so coming back to sort of what we think is part of the underlying problem. So, that's an important consideration. Now, one of the things that they did that was really clever, um, and I'm still a little bitter that I thought I didn't think of it before they did, is that they said, you know, when we say people, you know, before we'd tell people to go and exercise and they'd come back and say they couldn't, right? We never told them how, and one of the things they said is, okay, well, these patients feel miserable when they're standing up. You know, we probably shouldn't have them stand up and exercising, but, you know, it's worth trying this in clinic if you're a physician, you know, out there, that, you know, when you tell people to exercise, ask what they heard, what they, what they think that means, and most people will say something along the lines of walking, running, treadmills, those evil elliptical things, Right?

I mean, it's all vertical exercise, right? People think of exercise as vertical, So these guys said, no, not in the beginning. And so they recommended, they wanted people to use a rowing machine for different reasons, right? Besides the gravity issue, but gravity was one of them. They're sort of sitting and squatted down and, you know, you're small from a gravity point of view.

If you couldn't use a rowing machine, and this is an issue, right? Especially with the hypermobile. Folks, if your hips are involved, your shoulders are involved, I certainly recommend testing it out in a gym before you buy equipment, because a few people can't tolerate it, but I would say most of my patients can. Just because you have hypermobile joints that sometimes sublux, that doesn't mean it will. But if it does every time, that's not the exercise for you.

The backup plans are things like recumbent cycles. Make sure that the motion doesn't cause too much problems. Or swimming. Now, they live in Texas, right? Every other person has a pool in their backyard and they can use it.

I live in Calgary. We call outdoor pools ice rinks. So that doesn't really exist and there aren't enough indoor pools. So for most of my patients, we're really talking about recumbent cycles or recumbent cycles. Rowing machines.

What I tell people from a practical point of view is time and duration matter. So everyone has modified what they did in the Dallas protocol. They call it a modified Levine protocol after Ben Levine, who was the senior scientist and cardiologist that ran that study. And everyone modifies it differently. So, There's a CHOP protocol that's out there on different websites from the Children's Hospital of Pennsylvania, and they recommend starting with like 2 minutes and going to 3 minutes and 4 minutes.

The approach we've taken is to say, get to 30 minutes, which is what they recommend, but keep the load low and build up the load over time. So, frequency and duration matter. They make a big point of They need to exercise every other day to get into this aerobic training mode, to really get that heart, you know, getting bigger, so I actually ask people to try for 5 or 6 days a week, not because they absolutely need 5 or 6 days a week, but, you know, people's lives are busy, right, you know, people want to get better, people want to do this, but it's, you know, life will get in the way. A lot of people have kids. But even if you don't have kids, something happens that conspires against your ability to try and exercise.

And so if you try for, you know, 4 and you miss a couple of days, you're down to 2. If you try for 5 or 6, you're still sort of around that 4 mark to get that into training mode. Like I said, fairly quickly you should get to 30 minutes. Now, I've had people come back to me and say, you know, I can do 12 minutes and then I feel like I'm about to die. You know, if you feel like you're about to die, you should stop that day for sure, right?

It's not a matter of going on and saying, you know, I gotta keep, I gotta rush, I gotta keep going, right? If you're done, you're done for the day, but you messed up. And what I mean by that is, With the rowing machines and the recumbent cycles, there's a resistance dial to make it harder or easier. And I tell everyone to turn it all the way down, make it as easy as possible. If there was a self rowing mode, you'd turn it on, but they don't have that.

But it's, you know, you turn it all the way down, so it's easy, easy, easy. And then the only other input is speed. At 12 minutes, if you're burned out, if you turn the resistance down and you're burned out at 12 minutes, that means you went out too quickly for what you're able to do. So next time, go out more slowly. Right, and the challenge is that a lot of patients are competing.

They're competing against their partner. They're competing against their kids. They're competing against They're former selves, right? I used to be able to do this, I need to be able to do this, and I tell them to stop. It's not about, get to 30 minutes, don't worry about how slow you are, and then over time, as they keep doing this, they may want to add resistance to make it, because that, you know, sometimes if there's no resistance, it's, it's almost painfully too easy, right?

Where it's not as comfortable, and they may want to add duration to it. But that's all for later. I won't worry about that in the beginning. In the beginning, the focus is really on no resistance, get to 30 minutes, get in that habit. And then the, the challenge is that it doesn't, the benefits don't happen right away.

When I started doing this after the paper first came out about 15 years ago, you know, I'd recommend this and we had data now and patients would come back to me. You know, for a follow up visit, and say, yeah, you know, the exercise, I don't think that, that wasn't for me, that didn't apply to me, I didn't start to get any better. And, I had to actually call up Dr. Chi Fu, who was leading the study, and say, what am I doing wrong? She said, well, we said everyone got better, we didn't say it happened right away.

And, you know, it's a three to six month study and she said it can take a while and, and, you know, she's right. If you told me to go exercise and you'll feel better, I'd give it a couple of weeks. But the truth is, it can take up to six weeks before our patients notice any improvement. And in that time, they may well feel worse. I do believe that a lot of our POTS patients have post exertional malaise and I believe a lot of them have trained out of it, but not right away.

And so, you have to warn patients. That it's going to take six weeks. If they're going to do it, this is an investment. And part of that is also thinking about when to do it, So if you're a student, for example, you don't want to start at the beginning of December, because you're about to hit finals. You want to start, you know, maybe after finals where, you know, if you're feeling a bit miserable for extra miserable for a few weeks, it's not the worst time for that to happen.

So exercise is sort of the fourth pillar. And it's the one that takes the most time. But in terms of sustainability, it's important. And the interesting thing, Is that in the beginning when people start this, we're asking them to do things that make them feel horrible. They feel worse when they exercise in the first few weeks.

Around that point between four and six weeks when they start to notice improvement, I've had patients tell me they feel worse when they miss a day of exercise. Right, so, like, something switches, but it's, you know, I say there's light at the end of the tunnel, but it's a long tunnel to get there, and that's the challenge, right, we're asking you to sort of do stuff without reward right away, and there are lots of patients that would swear by that approach, but it's the toughest, obviously, of all the things we've talked about. So that's the non pharmacological foundation for everyone. And not, obviously, some people have specific challenges, we're not able to tolerate all of those things, but those are the things we would suggest. Some people, for example, have so much pain sensitivity in the abdomen, they can't wear compression garments.

You know, they can't have anything touching their belly, it's hard to squish it. But you work with what you can work with. Most people, as I said, can get the salt and water in, some can't. The salt, you know, generally best tolerated with food. Some people hate the taste of salt in food, they won't eat it, in which case they have to come up with different approaches, and there are certainly buffered salt tablets that can help, but I don't tend to use them as much because of cost, people can sometimes add salt water to their water bottles and drink it or add it To hot water and lemon juice and drink it.

Some young patients even do salt water shots. Right, that's sort of like a margarita without the really good stuff. The point is, there's not a right way to do it or a wrong way to do it. But what we're asking patients to do is not to do this once, but to do this daily. So they need to find the way that works for them.

Right, so we can make some suggestions of things that work for others, but people really need to individualize this so it fits in with their life. And then the final layer of treatment is then, you know, do they need drugs? And depending on how severe the symptoms were and how high the heart rates were, some people want to try the non pharmacological approach for a while and see how they do before deciding if they want to take drugs, and others are, you know, I feel miserable, I think we should Do both at the same time, um, and then, you know, if we're using drugs, then it's a question of what, when, and why. If their heart rates are really, really high, so let's say on standing the heart rates are getting into the 130, 140 beat per minute range, I found that lowering the heart rate a little bit, taking the edge off the heart rate increase, Usually has significant symptomatic benefits. So, historically, I've been a big proponent of low doses of propranolol.

Each pill works for about 4 hours at a time. It's a non selective beta blocker, short acting. And our typical starting dose would be 10mg 4 times a day. If someone needs more, we can go higher, but I rarely would go higher than 20mg 4 times a day. Right, because the goal is not to fix the heart rate.

It's not to normalize it, it's to prevent it from going as high. So if instead of peaking at one 30, if it peaks at one 15, still high, still abnormal, right? Patients could feel a lot better if their heart rates aren't as high. The other option, the newer, shinier option is of Aberdeen. You know, some people prefer that.

We're actually doing a study comparing the two right now to see if as a group, if one is better than the other. Ivabradine has some insurance and cost challenges. Both in Canada and the US, it's a bit more expensive, but it's certainly available, and it's an off label use, but a reasonable thing to use, and there's some data out of UC San Diego that it actually is helpful in POTS compared to placebo, just like there's some data that propranolol is helpful compared to placebo, but just to know which is better. If the blood pressure is really low, you alluded to some people have low blood pressures. You know, with POTS and vasovagal syncope and stuff, if the blood, say the blood, sitting, resting blood pressure is in the 90s, you know, propranolol and ibuprofen, if you take the edge off the heart rate, it can make the blood pressure a bit worse.

And so, in those patients, we may use a drug that squishes the vessels a little bit, like mitadrine. Uh, so this is a short acting presser drug. It squishes arteries and squishes veins. And it too works for about four hours at a time, but we'd only dose that three times a day because we don't really want that patients to take it at bedtime because they're supposed to be lying down at bedtime, right, we want them to take it when they're up and about. So we may individualize the drugs a little based on their characteristics.

But the non pharmacological foundation is pretty universal. And what about drugs like parotastigmine? I know that's something that's more commonly prescribed these days, it seems like. Yeah, so we, when we were at Vanderbilt, we actually looked at this in pots and we had an acute 4 hour study model where patients on a research unit, we'd give them a drug in the morning and The studies go from 9 to 11 and we look at heart rate response and, you know, it's, it's, Pyridostigmine is a drug that's on the market for a neurologic disorder called Myasthenia Gravis. And what it does is it actually, um, slows down the breakdown of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine.

So, effectively, you get more acetylcholine in the nerve terminals throughout the body. So, we showed that it, you know, in a, you know, lab controlled setting can lower the heart rate a little bit, right, so it does, it's going in the right direction. The truth is it's not a very potent drug, so, you know, a drug like a Vabradine or a propranolol will have much more potent heart rate lowering effects. A colleague in Toledo, a doctor named Blair Grubb, you know, actually started using it fairly aggressively in his clinic and then published a Data dump, where I think he had 300 patients, you know, and it wasn't a detailed study, but, you know, had a general sense of liked it or not, and I think about 60 percent liked it. Right, we don't have a lot of detail about exactly why and can't ask further questions, but, but, positive response.

About 20 percent had to stop. The drug couldn't tolerate it. And almost all of that were people that had diarrhea or abdominal cramping, because one of the things acetylcholine does is it increases gut motility. So, right now, if someone actually comes into clinic and tells me they have a lot of, they're prone to diarrhea, or they're prone to, you know, back and forth with diarrhea or constipation, but diarrhea is a common thing. Big part of it, I stay away from it, but if someone tells me they're prone to constipation, they have bowel movements every, you know, three days if they're lucky, this is sometimes the best drug they've had for the constipation.

It's not a laxative, it's actually working at the nerve terminals to, you know, increase the, you know, the, you know, signals to the gut, and it can be very effective. Generally speaking, it's a really well tolerated drug, so it's, you know, you know, if you try it and you get the cramp in your diarrhea, stop it, it'll go away, it's not going to do any long term harm to you. Okay. Well, that is a lot of really great information. I want to ask one last question before we get on to our hypermobility hack and wrap up.

In your experience, in your clinical experience, or maybe there's a study that also can inform this question, what percentage of people Are able to improve their quality of life sufficiently through the non pharmacologic methods so they don't need medication versus the percentage that actually do end up needing medication on top of the non pharmacologic. It's a difficult question because obviously my clinic is perhaps not a representative sample of the larger population, right? I mean, the people by the time there's a long wait to get in here and people that put up with all that probably feel a bit more miserable than the average. patient that may not want to put up with that. The vast majority that are on drugs as well, um, you know, it's probably somewhere 70 80 percent maybe north of that, um, having said that, there's also people that you start on drugs and then as they really get into the non pharmacological thing and their exercise routine, because the exercise doesn't work right away, it takes several months, um, and longer, I certainly have had some patients that are able to wean off drugs and their exercise Still doing the non pharmacological treatment alone, um, and that does happen, but I'd say the more common, I'm always intrigued when people come to me and one of the first things they say is, I don't want to be on drugs, and I actually think that that's actually the wrong way to look at it, I think what they should be saying is, I want to function better, right, and if I can do that without drugs, great, and if I need drugs, And in the end, I am better for it than great, um, and I'd say most of my patients, um, that I see do the non pharmacological things, but still need some drugs to help them function better.

Alright, um, so last question, uh, do you have a hypermobility hack to share with us? So some kind of, uh, quick win for people. So, one of the things that, uh, I was concerned about actually when, when starting to see patients with hypermobile Ehlers Danlos Syndrome or joint hypermobility syndrome in that spectrum was that, uh, the compression garments may be tough to, the tights may be tough to get on and off. Um, and they're not easy for anyone. But what I've had some patients tell me is that they actually found that it helped stabilize their joints.

Once they got it on, their joints, their hip joints and sometimes their knee joints actually felt a little more stable with the support from the compression garments. So that's not usually why I'm prescribing it, but that might be an added benefit. Very good. And, uh, before you go, can you let us know where we can learn more about you? Uh, well, I, I fear to ask, I avoid searching myself on the internet because I never know what people are going to say.

And you gave us a link that we can share in the show notes too. So we have, we have, our lab has set up a website, um, you know, through the University of Calgary, uh, our autonomic lab. It lists, you know, has, you know, bios and, and, uh, lists some of our, uh, we have some patient information brochures that we've created that we link to on the site, um, and we have hopes and visions of trying to, um, feed back to both our patient participants, our patient partners, as well as patients at large, some of the results from our studies as abstracts get published and, and, and papers get published, we want to be able to sort of put links to those there so that, you know, it can serve as a, um, Broader patient education forum as well. That's great. So we will have the link in the show notes so that people can go there and are there abstracts and papers there now?

Or is this something that's being worked on? If there are, not enough. This is in the work in progress section at the moment. I will harass our students to try and rush that. No problem.

Um, okay. Well, Dr. Raj, thank you again so very much for coming and chatting with me today. I know that your schedule is very, very busy, and I just really appreciate you taking the time to share your incredible knowledge and wisdom with us. Well, thank you for having me.

Well, I am so glad we got to chat with Dr. Raj and learn so much about POTS and specifically how he instructs his patients with those non pharmacologic methods. I feel like those very, very specific portions of those instructions are going to help a lot of people because while a lot of people have heard, you know, increase your salt, increase your water, increase your exercise. The devil is definitely in the details. So I hope a lot of you found that really beneficial.

And I want to thank you so very much for listening to this week's episode of the Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD podcast. Help us spread the word about joint hypermobility and related disorders by leaving a review and sharing the podcast. This really helps raise awareness about these complex conditions. If you would like to dig deeper, you can meet with me one on one. Please check out the available options on the services page on my website at hypermobilitymd.

com. You can also find me, Dr. Linda Bluestein, on Instagram, Facebook, TikTok, Twitter, or LinkedIn at hypermobilitymd. You can find Human Content, my producing team, at humancontentpods on TikTok and Instagram. You can also find full video episodes up every week on YouTube.

On YouTube at Vendee Bodies Podcast. To learn about the Vendee Bodies Program Disclaimer and Ethics Policy, Submission Verification and Licensing Terms and HIPAA Release Terms, or to reach out with any questions, please visit VendeeBodiesPodcast. Vendee Bodies Podcast is a human content production. Thank you for being a part of our community and we'll catch you next time on the Vendee Bodies Podcast. Thank you so much for watching.

If you enjoyed this video, give it a thumbs up and leave a comment below. I love getting your feedback. Make sure to hit that subscribe button and ring the bell so you will never miss an update. We've got plenty more exciting content coming your way, and if you're looking for more episodes, just click on one of the videos on the screen right now. Thanks again for tuning in, and I'll see you in the next episode.
