---
num: 130
title: Hidden Causes of Painful Sex with Dr. Irwin Goldstein & Sue Goldstein (Ep 130)
date: '2025-01-30'
duration: 1h 24m
description: "In this episode of the Bendy Bodies Podcast, Dr. Linda Bluestein speaks with sexual health experts Dr. Irwin Goldstein & Sue Goldstein. This amazing husband and wife team share insights on common issues such as vestibulodynia, libido challenges, and treatment options ranging from physical therapy to hormone therapy.\_They explore the often-overlooked intersection of joint hypermobility conditions like Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS), Mast Cell Activation Syndrome (MCAS), and Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS) with sexual dysfunction. They discuss how connective tissue disorders impact sexual health, the role of the sacral nerve in arousal and pain, and how patients can advocate for better care. Whether you're struggling with pain during intimacy or looking for solutions, this episode offers practical advice and hope."
tags:
  - EDS
  - Women's Health
  - POTS
  - MCAS
  - Pelvic Health
  - Patient Advocacy
  - Neurology
audioUrl: >-
  https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH1637180283.mp3?updated=1738260786
videoUrl: 'https://youtu.be/csiK_Zmb_hk'
snippets: []
guests:
  - Dr. Irwin Goldstein
  - Dr. Sue Goldstein
guestImages: []
---
[00:33] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Welcome back, every bendy body, to the Bendy Bodies Podcast with your host and founder, Dr. Linda Bluestein, the Hypermobility MD. Today we will be speaking with Dr. Irwin Goldstein and his wife, Sue Goldstein. I am so excited to chat with Dr. Goldstein. He actually was my doctor quite a few years ago, and he is going to be sharing some incredible information with you today about sexual medicine and I'm really excited to get to see them next month because I will be speaking at the ISHWISH, which stands for International Society for Women's Sexual Health, in February about joint hypermobility, connective tissue disorders, mast cell activation syndrome, POTS, et cetera, and how that can impact sexual health. Dr. Goldstein is the director of sexual medicine at University of California San Diego and sees patients in his private practice, San Diego Sexual Medicine. Dr. Goldstein has authored more than 370 publications and edited 7 textbooks. He is a past editor-in-chief of Sexual Medicine Reviews and past editor of the Journal of Sexual Medicine. He is a past president of ISHWISH and also of the Sexual Medicine Society of North America. The World Association for Sexual Health awarded the gold medal to Dr. Goldstein in 2009 in recognition of his lifelong contributions to the field. He has received many awards for his work, including the ISHWISH Award for Distinguished service in women's sexual health, the Lifetime Achievement Award from the SMSNA, and the Lifetime Achievement Award from the International Society for Sexual Medicine. Sue Goldstein co-authored When Sex Isn't Good to provide education and empowerment to women with sexual dysfunction. She is an associate editor of the textbook of Female Sexual Function and Dysfunction and Female Sexual Pain Disorders and the author of multiple peer-reviewed papers. Sue is a past president of ISHWISH as well as the industry relations chair. The topic of sexual problems in people with joint hypermobility and related conditions is definitely not discussed often enough and probably affects almost every patient with EDS and related conditions. So I'm really excited to dig into this conversation. As always, this information is for educational purposes only and is not a substitute for personalized medical advice. Stick around until the very end so you don't miss any of our special hypermobility hacks. Here we go.

I am so excited to be here with Dr. Irwin Goldstein and Sue Goldstein, and I'm going to say right off the bat, Dr. Goldstein is my doctor. We are not going to discuss the specifics of my case today, except for the fact that when I was recovering from my Tarlov cyst surgery, I did actually travel to San Diego so I could get his expertise. So super excited to chat with him today. I've been wanting to do this for a really, really long time, and I know a lot of you have questions about sex. And of course, all of these conditions that we talk about on the podcast definitely can impact sexual function. So thank you so much for joining us today.

[03:39] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: We love you, Linda.

[00:33] Dr. Sue Goldstein: So excited to be here.

[03:43] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Fabulous, fabulous. Okay, well, as you may or may not know, this podcast covers a lot about joint hypermobility, connective tissue disorders like the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes, comorbidities like POTS and MCAS. And the healthcare professionals who care for these complex patients often listen to the show. So, Dr. Goldstein, can you start out by telling us why this population should be interested in sexual health?

[04:07] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Oh my gosh. How many hours do we have here?

[04:11] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

[04:12] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Well, connective tissue, let's argue, is really important towards everything and anything we do. And sex, clearly. And the mechanisms of sex, like the neurologic transfer of information from the genitals to the brain, has to pass through the spinal cord area. And in the spinal cord area, there are discs and the discs are full of connective tissue and people who have connective tissue problems get Tarlov cysts and annular tears and those things sort of change the course of the sacral spinal nerve root that's carrying all this cool information to the brain and it causes it to be irritated and then people get unwanted unhappy feelings called dysesthesias, including unwanted arousals and stuff like that. So for at least that reason. But there's another important reason, and that's the vestibule is the entrance to the vagina. And there is a crossing, crossing, got to get my hands in here, crossing of the conditions of people who have aberrant mast cell activity. So that's those Ehlers-Danlos is an example of a condition with aberrant mast cell activity. And there are women who have pain during penetration, even as early as their first tampon, that fits into this mast cell aberrant condition sort of syndrome. That's called neuroproliferative vestibulodynia. So we'll see them from a vestibulodynia perspective. We'll see them from a neurologic perspective, and sadly, it's extremely common.

[05:58] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure. And vestibulodynia is pain in the vestibule. Is that correct?

[06:03] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Okay.

[06:04] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

[06:04] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: You can have nosodynia, chinodynia, foreheadodynia, and vestibulodynia.

[06:11] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Now he's just being silly.

[06:13] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. Okay. So I feel like there's just so many different ways in which these conditions can impact sexual health, because when I was asking for people for questions and we have some great questions that we'll address in the second half of the program. People were asking questions about things even like sexual positions and, and things like that. So there's a lot of different ways, right, in which these conditions can impact the ability to have sex.

[06:40] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: No question about that. Sue, you talk.

[06:44] Dr. Sue Goldstein: No, I mean, really, there's, there's two different things going on with that last comment that you made, Linda. I mean, the ability to have sex if you physically need to move a certain way and you, and your EDS keeps you from being able to bend a certain way, or you're going to bend and go too far and injure yourself. But then, you know, the other— the mast cell conditions that you might have, if you have irritable bowel syndrome and, you know, IC, interstitial cystitis, you may not feel comfortable having sex. You're afraid of what's going to happen. But vestibulodynia, I mean, it just hurts. And it's not just hurting during sex. It may hurt to wear tight pants. It may hurt to sit for a long time. So that it really impacts your quality of life. And I think sexual function becomes a major indicator of quality of life. When you have to stop having sex, that's the— that is a huge deficit in your quality of life.

[07:37] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And can definitely impact relationships. And of course, relationships are important. So it can start kind of a downward spiral that can be really, really problematic for people.

[07:47] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: But the good news is— sorry, you talk.

[07:50] Dr. Sue Goldstein: No, no, I mean, these people have different— I have a patient right now who is in nursing school, and she's had to take 3 semesters off until she can get, you know, all of this taken care of because she can't sit in a classroom. So it's not just this, you know, the sexual part, even though it's a sexual organ, if we're gonna talk about the vestibule, but it, you know, it can stop you from just plain living.

[08:13] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: So we didn't talk about endometriosis, which is another associated condition with Ehlers-Danlos as part of a condition with aberrant mast cell activity. And endometriosis is just awful because your periods are ridiculously painful, you bleed a lot, Penetration is okay. It's the thrusting that knocks you down because typically the endometriosis is involved in the utero-sacral ligament, which is the thing that holds the vagina in place. So if you move the vagina, you move that ligament, which causes pain. So there's countless issues.

[08:45] Dr. Sue Goldstein: And again, you're missing days of school, you're missing days of work because your menstruation is so painful from the endometriosis, far beyond the people who just have more common dysmenorrhea. So your life is really impacted with, with any and all of these aberrant mast cell conditions.

[09:04] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And that's an interesting distinction between pain with penetration versus pain with thrusting, because I feel like most doctors are not going to ask those really, really specific questions. Right.

[09:16] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Well, either they're not knowledgeable enough to ask the questions or they're not comfortable enough having the conversation. I mean, there's a lot of research that shows that patients are fearful of embarrassing their doctors if they bring up a conversation about sexual function and they want their doctors to bring it up. But the doctors are not comfortable having that conversation either because of their own background, their lack of knowledge, their religious upbringing, or just the fact that they have 12 or 15 minutes to have the conversation. And one of the things that we teach at the International Society for the Study of Women's Sexual Health is start the conversation. If the patient says yes, she has an issue, say, you know what, Mary, this is such an important conversation. Let's schedule another appointment just to have that conversation. In that moment, she was told, this is a safe space to have this discussion. That you are not alone because clearly he knows what you're talking about and that either he is going to help you or his nurse practitioner is going to help you, or he is going to find somebody else to help you. But the 3 most important things, you have validated this for the patient and made her realize she's not alone, which is one of the huge struggles. And I think one of the blessings of the internet is that people are able to find out that they aren't alone, that other people have this problem. But one of the problems with the internet is that they get a lot of bogus information.

[10:27] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: But I want to say something. You're talking about doctor learning. What's amazing about this current era is the podcast, the Bendy Bodies, all of these support groups on the various Reddits and Facebooks. The information is happening at a fast pace now. You know, I just had a woman in the office with this neuroproliferative vestibulodynia who had it all her life. And she was informed, oh, go have a glass of wine. Or one doctor actually told her to have more orgasms because that's what will stop her problem. I mean, really ridiculous information. And she got care while she was in her 50s, and basically her whole life she's had this condition. Whereas we're now getting kids who are 18 years old and 20 years old who are saying on support groups, I can't have sex. What do I need to know? And blah, blah, blah. And they're learning about neuroproliferative vestibulodynia at an early age and getting care. My last 4 surgeries were done in individuals who were born after the year 2000. It's pretty amazing.

[11:35] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Just shows how old you and I are getting.

[11:39] Dr. Linda Bluestein: But it's true.

[11:40] Dr. Sue Goldstein: I have a mantra. It says the educated patient is the empowered patient. And the more education that we can get out through sources that are available. I mean, last year we published a paper on vestibulodynia and we convinced the editor to allow it to be open access. Open access. That means that it was available for people to read. And the rationale I gave him was that physicians either have a subscription to that journal or have access to the journal, but patients don't. And they're the ones that need to know because they're the ones coming up against the gaslighting. They, they're seeing clinicians who don't know enough about the disease state to recognize that there's nothing to be seen when they are on exam. And that doesn't mean there's nothing wrong. I mean, my husband taught me 40 years ago, listen to a patient long enough and they will tell you what's wrong with you. And when you have that 15-minute visit, you don't always have a chance to do that, which is why in our office, for instance, they sit down in Irwin's office for an hour before we even examine them because we wanna listen to every nuance and we wanna give women or, or all patients, I'm sorry, you know, the respect that they know what's going on. They may not know why it's going on, they may not know the diagnosis, but they know what's going on in their bodies. And we have to respect that. And so that's why having educational material available to all people. So thank you for doing your podcast so that more people have access to this information.

[12:58] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: And not to keep this going crazy, but the Tarlov cyst thing, I mean, I kind of tell you how many people are told all Tarlov cysts are incidental. They don't mean anything. They don't do anything. In my experience, Mrs. Jones, your Tarlov cyst is, they're going after the wrong thing if you think it's a Tarlov cyst. I mean, I don't get it, but a Tarlov cyst really displaces the sacral nerve root. I mean, give me a break. And there's plenty of evidence that— I mean, the key evidence is getting a lidocaine injection where the Tarlov cyst is to numb it. God bless. If your symptoms significantly reduce, give me a break. What other conclusion can you draw?

[13:39] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And that's exactly what happened to me when I had a selective nerve root block. Yes. My pain went away 100%. For the first time in years.

[13:47] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Amazing. Amazing.

[13:49] Dr. Linda Bluestein: It was amazing. And I had surgery with Dr. Frank Feigenbaum, and that's how I found out about you. And I've interviewed him on the podcast. So we have an episode about Tarlov cysts, and we can link that in the show notes as well, because people definitely should check that out. I find such a huge number of my patients have Tarlov cysts. And like you said, they're told—

[14:09] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: They're all incidental. They're not.

[14:10] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Exactly.

[14:10] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: It's something else.

[14:11] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Yeah, well, again, it's lack of education on behalf of the provider who's saying that unless they have an interest in learning more about, you know, the sexual health issues that can occur from it, that information is not going to come to them. They have to seek it to learn it. So I always said to our patients, go back to your doctor who didn't know better and tell him or her about this information. So maybe the next patient won't have to struggle for so long finding help.

[14:33] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm. Yeah, that's an excellent suggestion. And, and Tarlov cysts can cause so many other symptoms, right? Because like you said, there's sacral nerve roots, which actually are going to supply more than just the perineum.

[14:46] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Okay, Linda, let's do a pop quiz. Tell me the 3 nerves.

[14:50] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, yes.

[14:50] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Tell me the 3 nerves in the sacral spinal nerve root. Say the word pudendal.

[14:56] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I was just going to say pudendal. That was the one that I was going to say.

[14:59] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Say the word sciatic.

[15:01] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sciatic. Okay.

[15:02] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Say the third is pelvic.

[15:04] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

[15:04] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: So pelvic is the inside of the clitoris. It's the bladder. It's the rectum. It's the vagina, the cervix, the uterus. The pudendal is all the external stuff from the clitoris down to the perianal area. And the sciatic is your butt and your thigh and your calf and your toes and your feet. So all of these weird symptoms that confuse people, if you have in a symptom complex something related to your lower extremity, like your butt or your toe or your leg, something related to your front like your vulva or the perineum and something related to the pelvic nerve, like your belly button, which is weirdly sensitive. Was yours weirdly sensitive?

[15:50] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I don't remember that actually.

[15:51] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Okay. It's a pelvic nerve thing. But my whole point is that there's nothing else that can cause these symptoms coming from one pathology other than the Tarlov cyst and the annular tear. Now the weirdest part of having EDS is you can have both an annular tear and ptosis because they're both connective tissue related. And we have to do a lot of more detective work to figure out which is which, which is the one causing the pathology. But we do that.

[16:18] Dr. Sue Goldstein: But we see patients with itchiness in their crotch and everyone assumes they have a yeast infection and then they give them treatment and it doesn't do anything. Well, because it's coming from the sacral spinal nerve roots. Or burning when they pee and they assume that they have some kind of a urinary tract infection, but there's nothing when you culture them. It's because it's coming from sacral spinal nerve roots. So things can happen in one part of your body coming from another part of your body. And for people who have spine issues, you know, it can affect anything in your lower body. And one of my friends always calls it a sex detective because that's what we are. We have to figure out what, you know, listen to what's happening and then figure out where is the problem, where is the pathology actually occurring? Is it at the location of the problem or someplace further upstream? Makes it a challenge and it makes it more fun. I mean, I'm not a clinician, and full disclosure, I'm a clinical researcher and I'm a sexuality educator, but I'm very involved in all of this that we have to do. So while I'm not a physician, I have a far greater understanding of this aspect of medicine than most physicians because they're not involved in it. But don't ask me anything about other parts of medicine. I don't know.

[17:22] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Hey, Sue, you think you just do 2 jobs? You do about 85 jobs.

[17:26] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Yeah, well, my office, I'm a jack of all trades.

[17:28] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: You're the president of ISHWISH going on, surgery scheduler, running all our research, Give me a break.

[17:34] Dr. Sue Goldstein: I say I'm a jack of all trades and master of most out of necessity. But I wanna give call out to my, in my office to Claudia, who is my compadre. Between Claudia and myself, we sort of make sure everything has happened, train all of our new staff except for our nurse practitioners, of course, they're trained under Irwin. But I just wanna give a shout out to Claudia 'cause my life would not exist without her helping me with everything. She's our administrator, our HR officer, my co-researcher, and she, like me, does a little bit of everything. And I know this is not a promotion for San Diego Sexual Medicine, but I love Claudia, so I'm gonna do it. Just using this platform to say thank you.

[18:08] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, I, I feel like one of the things that it was explained to me by one of my GYNs fairly early on was that, that basically like from the waist to maybe the mid-thigh is, is a little bit of a black box for most physicians, even if you are a urologist, as Dr. Goldstein is, or if you are a gynecologist. Yes, you learn how to do surgeries and you learn a lot about that area, but in terms of like the the functioning of the musculature and a lot of the other problems that can happen in that area. It seems like there's a lot of people that really struggle to get answers. And of course, the ideal thing is if they can get help by somebody who they can go to the ISHWISH website or something like that in order to find someone who is a sex detective, a doctor who's a sex detective. However, not everyone can do that. So what I would love to do is give people some pearls and some things that they might be able to try on their own, because the other thing I feel like is there are some low-hanging fruit that can be tried for some of these problems that people might have. So could either of you give us some suggestions or some ideas of some things that are, you know, pretty easy for people to try on their own that might be helpful?

[19:20] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Ouch. Sue, you start.

[19:21] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Well, I mean, I think one of the things is to have their gynecologist check their hormone values, because a lot of young women, for instance, who've been on oral contraceptives have very low testosterone, which not, not in everybody, but in many women causes pain. And because they're young, everyone says, oh, it must be in your head, have a glass of wine. So that shouldn't be too hard to get a primary care or gynecologist to order some hormone levels and see if they're normal. And normal, normal for premenopausal women is, you know, it's pretty easy to adjust. The problem is with postmenopausal women, the norm done by labs was really the average of menopausal women who have sexual problems. And so Dr. Goldstein, Dr. Gay, they did a study years ago in women that actually were normal and had never taken any hormones to get real normal values. But we look at the upper tertile of that range of normal for a lab. So those are things that you should be able to do with your doctor. And if he or she has trouble interpreting the labs, maybe, you know, you can look at your own labs, look at the reference range from your lab and see if you're in the upper tertile. So that's, that's something you can do. And the other thing that we can— you can do to see if you have nerve— if your pain may be from neuroproliferative vestibulodynia is as your belly button sensitive, and that's sort of a key. And the other thing is the Q-tip test. You take a little, take a Q-tip and just run it very softly on your vestibule. And if you have pain because of your hormones, you're just gonna feel it. But if you have neuroproliferative vestibulodynia, you're gonna have intense pain just from that very soft rub. And so those are sort of keys, you know, or cues to you, you know, what's going on. And Irwin, what are your thoughts?

[20:59] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Well, Sue, brilliant, brilliant Sue just spoke of a thing called allodynia. Remember we talked about nosodynia and chinodynia allodynia means the opposite of pain. So if you take, here's my wrist, and you take, you can do this, Linda, do this, tickle your back of your hand. It doesn't hurt you, right?

[21:18] Dr. Linda Bluestein: It actually does, because I have a nerve, I had surgery here and I got serious reactions.

[21:24] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Oh, you want the other hand.

[21:24] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Switch hands. Switch hands. Because if you have the correct density of nerve endings called nociceptors in the skin, when you tickle, you'll get a tickle response. The problem in the women who have this form of vestibulodynia of too many mast cells and too many nerves, which is common in EDS patients, you have like a million or so nerve endings just in this little piece of skin. So when you activate them through just a tickle, you get this burning, awful allodynic response, which is not the tickle. And that's not a good sign to have a burning response to a tickle. So it's a positive allodynia test. I think what I would say to being the biology-oriented person, and I don't know about tips at home, but certainly with providers, A is get sex therapy involved, get a psychologist involved. You need help. This is annoying and disturbing and unrelenting and unremitting. You know, it's just frustrating. So get someone that you can speak with who is positive and, you know, gonna work with you towards relationship help and provider help, et cetera. The next thing—

[22:42] Dr. Sue Goldstein: I'm gonna stop you there for a second. We'll stop you a second. He's not saying go to a therapist instead of a physician. He's saying go to a therapist and a physician, that you need to have the medical problems treated, but the medical problems cause so many other issues, relationship issues, psychological issues, that you need the therapist at the same time or after the treatment's been finished. So I'm sorry, I just wanted to make sure people understood you weren't saying, you know, get a glass of wine and go to therapy.

[23:07] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

[23:07] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Saying, you know, get treatment and go to therapy. Okay. Sorry.

[23:10] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Linda, pop quiz. What does Sue say? What type of therapy do we do in sexual medicine?

[23:18] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Bio, psycho, social. Yep.

[23:20] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Good job.

[23:21] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. No, that's so, that's so important because I feel like, you know, yes. And I know in your office, that is like everybody. Yeah. That is how you do the evaluation. You see a physical, a pelvic floor physical therapist, you see a psychologist, and then you see you, at least this is what I did, and then you sent me off to eat lunch, and then you said, come back and we're gonna talk about you. And then when you come back, we're gonna tell you what to do. So, so, so I think that's a fantastic approach. And just a little heads up, because some of the people listening to this are gonna say, wow, that's a great idea, but either I don't have insurance or I'm in a different part of the world where I don't have access to a psychologist. But there are even like some apps that, you know, of course one-on-one is always better, right? But if they, if they can't access one-on-one counseling, there are some other types of either group counseling or apps and things like that that I think might be at least a little bit helpful.

[24:14] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: But therapists no longer do one-on-one. It's all Zoom. So you can telemedicine from wherever the hell you are.

[24:20] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, that's still one-on-one.

[24:24] Dr. Sue Goldstein: They just have to have a license.

[24:24] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Thought you meant one-on-one.

[24:26] Dr. Sue Goldstein: No, no, no, she meant a physically person. But AASECT certified sex therapists exist around the world, obviously not in every country, but even though it's an American organization and I'm a member of that as a certified sexuality counselor, they have lists of providers around the world and there are many AASECT certified therapists in other parts of the world. So that is a wonderful resource for everybody out there to go on the AASECT site and they have, they have a find a provider section. I can't tell you off the top of my head what, you know, where it is on that site, but you'll see it and you can look for a provider that can help you for that. And the same thing with physical therapy. If you're going to physical therapy, you want to go, go to a pelvic floor physical therapist. Everybody gets trained in orthopedics, but you have to go on to additional training to be a pelvic floor physical therapist. And you can go, if you go to I can't— I'm trying to think of what it is. It's, it's the Women's Physical Therapy Association, APTA, American Physical Therapy Association. They should have a section. It's under women's physical therapy, I believe, even though there are men who need pelvic floor physical therapy. But that's where you would find the pelvic floor physical therapy listing as well. So take advantage of the internet and find people. And we recognize that not everybody who's certified means that they know what they're doing. It's like anybody else. You know, you have to do your research, do your homework. You don't want to be the first person going to somebody straight out of school necessarily. But there are resources that people can use that will, you know, show beyond just in your local community. So take advantage and find somebody that you— that would be helpful.

[26:06] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: So, so let me continue. So you need the biopsychosocial, so you need the therapist, but you need the biology too. So in the history of us in sexual medicine being involved in EDS in Tarlov cyst work and in annular tear work. We had no idea that any of this could be related to sexuality, but we did know if you had pain, you could take a medicine that addressed the pain. You could do gabapentin, pregabalin, you could do amitriptyline, you could do— there's a laundry list of these things. You could do SSRI, Cymbalta, and they're very helpful. And in conjunction with getting pharmaceutical reduction of the symptoms, you can then try to figure out a way to find the trigger. Because obviously finding the trigger, as you did, is the key way to live your life without the need for these medicines. But until you get to the trigger, you don't have to be on nothing. You could be on something.

[27:16] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Thing.

[27:17] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: So that's the trick, I would say, is find someone to help you with the symptoms, a pain medicine doctor in particular, and maybe pudendal nerve blocks, maybe whatever. But my point is, don't give up on the detective part because that's the way to the cure.

[27:32] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, absolutely. If you don't address the root cause, then it's— the problem is going to continue for sure. And that's where it drives me crazy that so often radiologists will put in their findings, they might say, they might comment that there's a Tarlov cyst. They won't say how big it is oftentimes, but they don't put it in the impression. So if somebody just looks at the impression, it's often not in there. Of course, that's just one of many things that can cause sexual problems, right, in this population of people. So, and there's even simple things— or I shouldn't say simple, but, you know, I— one of the questions that I got was, well, what about tearing of the tissues down there? Because people have more fragile tissues if they have Ehlers-Danlos. so even something like, like that, that's a more maybe straightforward type of problem. Of course, it could be hormone-related, but could be due to menopause, which is also obviously a hormone big hormone shift in life. But are there simple things that can be done for that?

[28:26] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Well, yes. Estrogen, testosterone creams can be done. They're compounded. So you need a provider for that. I was going to say something. Yeah. Lichen sclerosis. We see— I don't know the association. I think there are— yes, skin conditions are more common in individuals with EDS. And some of the skin conditions we see are lichen sclerosis. Which makes the tissue less stretchy and more likely to have fissures. It's called fissures. They're typically at the 6 o'clock region of the posterior fourchette, and during sexuality they tear and they really hurt.

[28:59] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And in terms of testosterone therapy and, and/or estrogen therapy, there's different ways, right? There's the topical, and then you can also do like testosterone injections or different types of modes of administration. And I'm sure the contraindications are different depending on how it's being administered. But are you able to share some of those contraindications with us? As well.

[29:21] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: So do you want to do it? You're on the— well, I mean, you were on the committee.

[29:24] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Yeah, well, so are you. I mean, the thing is that, you know, hormones are both systemic and local. So hormones that you apply to your— we're talking really to the vestibule— it's compounded testosterone and estradiol. It's such a low, low amount of testosterone and estradiol, I don't believe there are any contraindications to that. inside your vagina, we prefer to put— use dehydroepiandrosterone, which is actually higher up in the cascade and becomes testosterone and breaks down to estradiol. And so it's— what's cool about it is it's intracellular, so it doesn't actually leak into the bloodstream. So you don't get systemic hormones. It was developed by someone whose daughter unfortunately died in her 30s of breast cancer. But while she was still alive, he was trying to give her quality of life. He knew that she, you know, she couldn't have have certain, fearful of certain hormones because of the breast cancer. And so he, he developed this, this whole concept of intracellular, mechanism. He's really— he's, he published— he passed away a couple years ago. He published more than 1,200 papers up in Canada. brilliant man. so that's what we, you know, we like to do. Although you can, you can also put estradiol into vagina if you're not able to get the DHEA. That's separate from, from having a systemic. So going into your whole body, and, you know, testosterone can be delivered by injection, but it's really It's hard for women 'cause it's such a small volume. We typically use the gel that's approved for a man, and we use approximately a 10th of a man's dose, somewhere between a 10th and a 14th. And it would be, you know, really adjusted based on where your levels are. We would follow up because we believe in, what's the word I'm looking for? Monitoring. We believe in monitored hormone therapy. So, you know, at 6 weeks or at 3 months, we would redo blood tests to make sure they stay in the safe region. So, what can testosterone do to you? Testosterone can turn you into a man. That's what transgender women who want to become a man do. They get testosterone. But we're not giving you anywhere near that dose. People always say, well, I'm going to have a low voice. And I tell people I was a first soprano when I started on testosterone 23 years ago, and I am still a first soprano. Matter of fact, I used to only get up to a high G. I can get to a high A now.

[31:38] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Hey Sue, who was your doctor who gave you the testosterone?

[31:40] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Oh, was that you?

[31:42] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Oh, yes.

[31:43] Dr. Sue Goldstein: You also get hair growth. And but menopausal women get hair growth too. So, you know, you might get a few hairs on your chin kind of thing. So, okay, so you pull them out, you do electrolysis, whatever you want. I mean, to me, the positive of having testosterone, the benefits are far greater than, than any of the negative issues. I mean, most of the things that you hear about causing problems with testosterone is when you're getting a super physiologic level, you're getting too much testosterone into your system. I mean, when we are premenopausal, before you were on an oral contraceptive, we have X amount of testosterone in our bodies. And all we're trying to do is resupply some of that. Now here, Linda, this may surprise you. Most people, most, you ask a gynecologist how much estradiol you have in your body and how much testosterone, they'll say, oh, you have far more estradiol. So is that true? Do you have more estradiol or more testosterone in a premenopausal?

[32:33] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I'm guessing that that's not true because otherwise I don't think it escalates.

[32:37] Dr. Sue Goldstein: So they look at graphs and they say, okay, you have this much estradiol and only this much testosterone. They don't look at the fact that they, that the actual units, units is different. Women have 5 times the amount of testosterone in their body than estradiol. So to replace estradiol in menopausal women and say, well, you don't need testosterone because there's so little, is, is bogus. I mean, I just had a DEXA scan. I'm sorry, we're going off target here a little bit. I just had my DEXA a couple of weeks ago and my my percentage. I'm a 75-year-old woman. I'm not embarrassed to say my age. And my DEXA should really show, you know, losing on my hips and my spine. I gained 4.6% on my hips. I do not take Fosamax or any of the other things. I do not eat— I eat very little cheese. I don't drink milk, so I'm not getting calcium. It's because I had— I take testosterone and I exercise, and the testosterone gives me the muscle strength and the energy to exercise. And the ex— and, and exercise and testosterone both help maintain my bone mass. And in case, get it better. So, you know, if we're going to talk about side effects, there are positive side effects and negative side effects. And you couldn't pay me to get off the testosterone because it keeps me healthy, as do the other hormones that I'm on. And I'm sorry, I went far afield, so I apologize.

[33:55] Dr. Linda Bluestein: No, no, no, that's okay. And actually, I did want to follow up with, with two questions. One is you were talking about monitored hormone replacement therapy.

[34:05] Dr. Sue Goldstein: And I know—

[34:05] Dr. Linda Bluestein: yeah, so important. I totally agree. There's a lot of people that are doing things like pellets. Now, once you put that in, right, you can't, you can't control the dose. For until you do the next pellet. So what are your thoughts about that?

[34:18] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: We don't do pellets. I think it's, I don't know how to say this. For people who do pellets, I think they have other ulterior motives in place, but I think the issue is you should do something that you could stop at any time if there's a reason and you can't do that with pellets. So I think it's just unfair to the person. Now, having said That there are a group of people who love pellets who think it's a fabulous treatment, but it's just a little bit unsafe. The ideal way is to take it daily like everybody else takes their pills daily. You could take this daily and you can monitor the dose with blood levels. There's a second monitoring system. We do a thing called vulvoscopy, which is basically an intense camera placed between the legs and staring at the vulva. And that means the patient gets to see what we are seeing, which is an amazing experience. 'Cause people have almost have never seen the inside to their vagina and whatever.

[35:27] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Or the outside.

[35:29] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Or even the outside.

[35:29] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Most women don't look down to see what they look like. They don't even know their body parts. They tell you it hurts down there.

[35:34] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: When you do vulvoscopy prospectively on people who start off with menopause and then go into issues like now 1 year on treatment and 2 years on treatment, you see the tissues turn pink and healthy and lubricated. It's just, it's such a pleasant thing to watch the longitudinal improvement. So the monitoring is visual and hormonal blood test based.

[35:57] Dr. Sue Goldstein: But for people who wanna learn more about testosterone in women, ISHWISH did develop a process of care of how to prescribe, basically how to use testosterone in women. One of the things that the FDA says, if you put testosterone into cream, it will layer. It's fine for the topical testosterone and estradiol we put on the vestibule, because that's such a small amount. But if you're gonna get a tube from a compound pharmacy, you know, like a big tube like this, it's the test— the amount of testosterone on the top is different than the amount on the bottom. And so that's why the FDA says don't do that. That's why we choose to use an FDA-approved product. And the pellets you were just talking about, unless you're using the one FDA-approved product for men, none of those are FDA-approved, which means that they're, They don't necessarily know the guidelines they have to follow are far different than FDA-approved products. So take a look at the ISHWISH paper on testosterone. It'll tell you all the pros and cons, all the rationale, the physiology, the safety issues. It's all there, you know, to be seen, to be read. Okay.

[36:55] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: And another thing, go ISHWISH. Everybody should read, learn, know about ISHWISH and become members. Linda, you should have to become a member there. Oh my God.

[37:02] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I'm doing a presentation at the ISHWISH conference next month.

[36:55] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Oh my God.

[37:05] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

[37:07] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: You big time.

[37:09] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I can't wait to see you. I was invited to give a presentation, so I'll be talking about—

[37:13] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: so cool—

[37:14] Dr. Linda Bluestein: sex problems in this population with, with a pelvic floor physical therapist, a friend of mine. So we were together doing a presentation.

[37:21] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Pop quiz, one more pop quiz. When did this start? Oh my gosh, what is this year? This is our 25th anniversary. Oh yes, yes, year 2000 it started. Amazing.

[37:31] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, very, very exciting. That's so exciting. We're going to take a quick break, and when we come back, we're going to talk about veto, because that is another super important topic. So we will be right back.

[BREAK]

Okay, so we're back with Dr. Goldstein and with Sue Goldstein, and I want to make sure that we talk about libido because these problems can cause so much difficulty with sex, of course, which is so important for relationships. And as we talked about, it can be also problems with sitting and wearing tighter clothing, or, you know, other aspects of their life. But let's talk about libido and how how you have seen these conditions impact people and their libido and what can be done about that.

[39:06] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Okay, before we start, I just want to say Linda has announced that she has a sexual health issue, the Tarlov cyst, which led to her issues. And I just, as Sue's husband, I know that she has had this libido problem. And in the medicine, we call it HSDD, hypoactive sexual desire disorder. And I think it's very cool that both of are— we're talking to the public about these things, but you both have at least something. So I think it's very genuine what's going to happen here.

[39:39] Dr. Sue Goldstein: So HSDD, it's very, it's very interesting because a lot of women don't recognize that they've lost their libido, that their desire is down. They just— they're busy leading their lives and they don't let it bother them. They just go on. And for some people, they're having duty sex because they love their partner. And once they're having duty sex, during sex, they may have responsive desire. And so things feel good. But a lot of times it'll be, okay, you had sex yesterday, how was it? Oh, it was good. Well, you want to have sex tomorrow? Who cares? You know, there are a lot of different responses. Lillian Ardieu and I co-authored a book many years ago, When Sex Isn't Good, and I'm not giving a plug to the book. It's not, it's not relevant, except that we went out and we interviewed women with different sexual problems. And I think one of the most telling interviews with the women with low desire. One woman said she— I said, I dressed beige, I acted like a wallflower, she says, until I was treated. When I was treated, I started wearing fun, funky clothes again. I started driving my stick shift car. I started doing things again. And I always remembered that. For me personally, I literally wasn't having sex very often, and I thought— and it wasn't all that great. And I thought, oh, my husband is ED. How am I going to tell this world famous ED doctor he is ED? But I mean, he didn't. There's nothing wrong with him. And literally, he came home from the office with the Female Sexual Function Index, which was a brand new questionnaire at the time developed in order to figure out if a medication was effectively treating people in clinical trial conditions. And I took it and he goes, holy shit, you've got HSDD. Like, it didn't dawn on me. As engrossed as I was in the field, it didn't dawn on me that it was me because we really didn't know a lot about it. And for me personally, at the time, the only really good treatment was testosterone. And I was on testosterone for years. And the way I put it is, you know, when I was 25 and sex was great, now I was in my 50s. Instead of sex being a 10 out of 10, it was more like a 2 or 3 out of 10. But that was fine because that was better than a, you know, a 0 out of 10. And sex, sometimes I was interested and sometimes it was duty sex. And then I became interested. And I'm telling my story only because I know a lot of women can relate great to this. And then one day the testosterone stopped helping me, and I turned to my husband, I said, okay, now you have to fix me. I know what it's like to have my libido back, and it's gone again. I recognize it. At the beginning, I didn't recognize that, which is what happens to most people. I knew. I said, fix me. Well, ironically, it was just about the time that Flibanserin— it's the trade name— Addyi was approved. So I had to wait about 3 months for it to be available, and then that October I got my first pill. Now today we have a second treatment as well called brimelanotide, or trade name Vyleesi. So we have 2 options out there for women in addition to testosterone. So we have options out there. But for me, what I found most remarkable was that I hadn't realized how much was missing in our relationship until it was back, because these drugs are central mechanism drugs. That means they work in the brain. I tell people they reboot your brain. Somebody said, well, am I going to become a nymphomaniac? I go, well, were you a nymphomaniac when you were 18 and healthy? No. Well, it's going to bring you back. So now my, my sex is, you know, 8, 9, and 10 out of 10 much of the time. I'm a normal person. There was a day I'm exhausted and sex sucks. Excuse my language. There's a day that I have too much on my mind because something happened at the office and it's hard for me to stay focused on the, on actual, you know, the sex actually being involved with the sex. We all have those things happen. People without any kind of, you know, issue going on have those things happen. But I am my normal self. And when I, when I say that, that I recognize there was a playfulness that came back in our relationship that I hadn't recognized was missing because it's your whole body and your whole brain that is affected by any sexual dysfunction. It's not as obvious as the penis doesn't get hard because even if the penis gets hard, you have your brain has to work and your rest of your body is. So it's same thing. So if you, you know, you have ED, you have issues with, you know, your body functioning. But if your brain isn't there, if you're not in the game, if you're lying there, and all you're thinking about is, I have to put the wash into the dryer before it gets moldy. Oh, I forgot to buy milk for the kids' school tomorrow. And if that's all you can think about, it doesn't matter how well your body is working, you're not going to enjoy sexual activity. So I'm very happy that I live in a time and a generation where I have access to pharmacotherapy. Now, I I will tell you, we did a brief clinical trial in our office because that's what I— that's part of what I do. And we compared women with being on this medication with women who were on the medication plus having sex therapy with our sex therapist. And both showed— the majority of people showed improvement. I mean, 70% of people get improvement with any sexual health drug. But the people who were on the, the drug and the therapy had greater improvement more quickly. So like we started at the beginning of the conversation, you know, having therapy, both sex therapy and pharmacologic therapy is very helpful. So you can choose to have one, you can choose the other, choose to have both. Now, for me, I chose to do the pharmacotherapy and it worked for me. And I have— I'm 75 and I'm married more than 50 years and I have great sex. I tell people my husband has to practice what he preaches. What do you want from me? You know, but, but you know, what I'm saying is is your sexual function, particularly libido being in your brain, it affects so much more than just being able to have an orgasm, being able to arouse. It affects so much more. It affects your relationship. It affects how you think about yourself. And I'm sorry, I'm going back, but I'm gonna go back to the book that I talked about. One of the women, when she described having HSDD, everything she described was just like a woman who has breast cancer and had a mastectomy.

[45:42] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Me.

[45:43] Dr. Sue Goldstein: And I'm not in any way or shape or form saying that sexual problems are the same as having cancer. They're not. I mean, let's be honest. But the descriptors, she didn't feel like a woman, she didn't feel whole. That's what women who are survivors will say. And to have such a powerful message from these women were, you know, in their 20s and in their 30s and in relationships. One woman said to her husband, I just, I'm not interested. Go have sex with somebody else. Just be safe. Come home to me.

[46:15] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Literally.

[46:15] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Wow. Said this because they, they had a strong enough relationship. They love their partner. But if you had bad enough HSDD, it gets to the point that you actually will have, you get touch aversion because touch can lead to cuddling, can lead to kissing, can lead to sex. And you don't want sex either because it hurts or because you're not interested, whatever it is. And so you have, you know, this is how relationships can get destroyed. So we have to remember that it's our choice, it's our body. We can choose to be treated or not, but there are treatments out there. And if it, if you feel you have something going on and it bothers you and you can't get help at home, just keep looking because there's somebody out there that's going to help you. Go on the ISHWISH website. If you, you know, if you're, if you identify as a woman and find someone that can help you. Because there are people out there.

[47:04] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Let me bring this back to Linda and let me do another pop quiz with Linda. What are the 4 things that typically happen behind the low interest? What are the 4 things that typically explain low interest? So Sue mentioned neurotransmitter imbalance. So the phlebanserin sort of lowers the high serotonin, the vyleesi raises dopamine. So that's the neurotransmitter issue. The psychologist She said, I remember bringing up the psychologist, she mentioned she's on testosterone, which is hormone. What is the fourth factor, Linda? Pop quiz.

[47:41] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I don't know. I have no idea.

[47:43] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Well, you had a tarlov cyst, so neurologic issues.

[47:46] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure.

[47:46] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: So if the mass effect of the tarlov cyst or the dural inflammation from an annular tear injures the nerve roots, so it's hypo-functioning, if it's not sending a lot of information, so you're touching your and genitals, but you're not getting a lot of information flowing to the appropriate brain centers, then you're going to have low libido. I mean, if you don't feel, you're not going to have that much interest. So we see a lot of women with low interest who have EDS, who have Tarlov cysts or annular tears, who after we do, it's kind of cool, after we do the injection that you had, that focal injection in your back, they get their sensation back. Really cool.

[48:34] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And, and when— if somebody has PGAD, or persistent genital arousal disorder, is that almost the opposite, or not really?

[48:41] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: It's not almost the opposite, it is the opposite. Instead of the annular tear or Tarlov cyst irritating the nerve root, causing the nerve root to be hypo-functioning— that's the libido, low sensation— if it's hyper-functioning, functioning, then they're getting information, unwanted, unrelenting, into the region called the paracentral lobule, which is where all the sensation for the genitals and the lower extremities exist.

[49:06] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So some other questions that people posed, one of them was how to address sexual dysfunction and, you know, lack of sexual sex drive and inability to orgasm caused by POTS and/or dysautonomia, especially if they were taking beta blockers. Do you have any thoughts about that?

[49:22] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Whoa, that's very specific. I would have to speak to that person. We do courtesy calls, so it's my sort of ability to give back.

[49:36] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Yeah.

[49:37] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: I think it's, I view it as my opportunity to teach people who can't, they live somewhere else or they can't afford it. I get 10 minutes to speak to them. I don't treat them because they're not my patients, but I'll give them I think someone with dysautonomia and beta blockers, it's a little more specific and I would need to get a little more information, but we can help virtually almost anybody with logical and rational strategies. That's biopsychosocial. Okay.

[50:10] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

[50:11] Dr. Sue Goldstein: We're not going to promise anyone that you're going to be 100% who you were before the problems. We can't necessarily cure somebody, but we can treat somebody so they can live. If you have for instance, PGAD, that's 9 out of 10, and we can get it down to 2 out of 10, you can function in this world. Some people we totally cure and some people we can't. So I don't want people to think that everyone walking through a door is gonna leave, you know, 100% who they were before they had their problem. But we don't give up on patients. You know, we will continue to work. What we know today is so much more than what we knew 2 years ago, which was so much more than what we knew 2 years before that. And I think that's the most exciting thing is, you know, call a patient back, say, you know what, I didn't know how to deal with this before, but we've just figured out figure this out, come on in and let's try this. Because we are human beings, and as human beings, we are learners, and we can learn new things and then teach new things and then help more people.

[51:04] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: I have a cool story, a Linda story. So it's the year 2001. I don't even know where you were in the year 2001, but I was— Candyburgers. We won't go there. So there is a psychologist at Rutgers, Sandra Liebloom. She actually was the first president of ISHWISH. And she reported on a condition called PSS, Persistent Sexual Arousal Syndrome, which merged into PGAD because people didn't like the word sexual arousal. We flipped it to genital arousal, which was more appropriate because they were not sexually aroused. There's no sexuality going on in PGAD. So she's the psychologist and I was the biologist. So I got all of her PSS/PGAD patients. And all we did was give them pharmacotherapy. We presumed there was a neurotransmitter excess, the opposite of the one for low libido. Instead of too much inhibition and too little excitation, we believed that PGAD was too much excitation and too little inhibition. So we developed strategies to lower the excitation and to increase the inhibition. A drug, tramadol, is an opioid, and that increases inhibition because opioids inhibit. So we were giving a lot of these PGAD patients tramadol. And then it's 2012, so that's basically 11 years later, and I get an editor of a journal, and Dr. Barry Komisaruk happens to also be at Rutgers, submitted a paper in a support group population of PGAD patients where he asked them to get pelvic MRIs. And he said, oh my God, there's like 10 times the number of Tarlov cysts in the PGAD community than not. And I pick up the phone and I said, I said, Barry, if we publish this paper, it's good science, but if we publish this paper, you're going to force everyone with PGAD to get a pelvic MRI. And he said, well, it's good science. You have to publish this paper. And then we started doing pelvic MRIs and we were seeing they had not so many Tarlov cysts, but way more annular tears in the lower part of the pelvis. So we flipped them into lumbar MRIs. But where I'm going is it's just a continuous learning. You know, everybody participates at some level, including especially the patients. But we are constantly— we're doing things today that I wasn't even doing 6 months ago, just to be quite honest.

[53:26] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Which is why he'll never retire, because he keeps doing new things.

[53:30] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. And I'm glad to hear you say that, because in my practice, it's the exact same way. I have a small private practice, and I do things now that I didn't do 6 months ago, because like you said, we're continuously learning. So that's really exciting. Exciting. And I do want to clarify with PGAD, because some people might think, oh, that sounds like a great thing, but it's not, right?

[53:50] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Can you explain? Persistent genital arousal is, is the great thing. Persistent genital arousal disorder is the point that you can't concentrate on anything because you're constantly— imagine being a second grade teacher and your, your clitoris feels like it's constantly aroused with all the 7 and 8-year-old boys around you. You can never tell anybody in your school, but you have to slip into the bathroom to masturbate because then you have maybe an hour or 2 hours of relief from that arousal sensation. You know, this is not something that people can talk about, but their lives are hell. They get in a car and the vibration starts the arousal sensations. And an arousal isn't necessarily the clitoris feeling aroused. It can be any of the other dysesthesias, the burning, the cutting, feeling like razor blades, you know, all of these different sensations. And it occurs in all genders. It's not just in women. But they literally, you know, these are the people that can't— they have difficulty with jobs, they have difficulty working, they have difficult family, they have difficulty maintaining relationships. And how do you explain to your children, I can't do this with you right now because I can't get out of this arousal state. There was a gentleman who kept— he had to masturbate to ejaculation 7 or 8 times before he could leave his house because otherwise he would just get a spontaneous erection and then ejaculate in his pants, which is so much more obvious. But it's such a difficult problem for somebody to have. And when you examine them, they usually don't actually have a clitoris that's aroused. It's, that's, you know, that's engorged. It's the sensation in their brain. They're getting the mixed messages through, you know, through the, because of the Tarlov cyst or the annular tear. But it's not something that you can learn to live with when it's persistent genital arousal disorder. We do know people who have this in a very mild way. And for them, it's great because they're always ready. But they're not to the point that they can't live a life. I mean, it's awful.

[55:43] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: I call PGAD the monster. And of all the conditions, I hate to say this conversation, but of all the conditions that I've seen in all the years I've been doing this, many decades, that's the one associated with the most suicidality. I have sadly a whole bunch of individuals who are not with us today because they could get no relief from their PGAD.

[56:05] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, that's terrible. And in terms of what options there are besides if you do have a Tarlov cyst and potentially determining if you're a candidate for surgery on the Tarlov cyst. What, if anything else, can be done if you have PGAD?

[56:19] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Well, again, the original biologic strategy was to make inhibition higher in the brain.

[56:27] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Using the tramadol.

[56:28] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: The tramadol or amitriptyline or all the other things. Anti-epileptic. Epilepsy is like a focal seizure. So neuroleptics, things that stop neurologic transmission or impede neurologic transmission. So neuroleptics are the key. And SSRIs play a big role.

[56:49] Dr. Sue Goldstein: But those are band-aids.

[56:50] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Atypical.

[56:51] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Yeah.

[56:51] Dr. Sue Goldstein: I mean, you have to look.

[56:52] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: No, no, they're band-aids for sure. But at least, you know, we have, I have a woman, we started practice in 2007. 2007, she saw an article in the local newspaper, sexual medicine, blah, blah, blah. So she came at 2007. So it's 17 years later, it's 2024. She's still on tramadol as her prime therapy. It's worked fabulous for her. She's had a normal life and she has an annular tear, she doesn't want to deal with it, but God bless, that's her call.

[57:24] Dr. Sue Goldstein: But I was going to say, ISHWISH published a paper in PGAD and they really changed the way we look at management of all sexual health issues, dividing the body into 5 regions. And so with, with P— with anything you have, whether it's PGAD, whether it's a muted sensation problem, you need to find where the problem is located, whether it's region 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5, and then go after. So when you're talking about annular tear and, and sacral, Tarlov cysts, we're talking about a region 3 disorder. But you could have pudendal neuropathy that's causing it. We have a patient that comes in once a year for pudendal nerve block, and her PGAD is totally in control when she started, she had to do it every 3 months, then every 6 months, and now it's literally once a year.

[58:03] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Okay, pop quiz. Pop quiz to Linda. What is the most common reason for having a region 2 pathology causing PGAD?

[58:13] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I don't even know what region 2 is.

[58:14] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Oh, it's your pelvis perineum, your crotch area, basically.

[58:17] Dr. Sue Goldstein: So if you need a pelvic nerve block to get you better, he's saying, what caused that problem? What's the most common reason to cause a problem there?

[58:13] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I don't know.

[58:25] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Say bike riding. She was a spin bike rider. She did an hour of spinning and sometimes she did an extra hour 'cause the instructor needed other people there every day and the banging of her. So this is her crotch. This is the banging. And she developed injury to the pudendal nerve, sent too much message to the brain, and that was her PGAD.

[58:46] Dr. Sue Goldstein: But we also talked about people with vestibulodynia, which is a mast cell disease. Sometimes instead of the vestibulodynia causing pain, as is normal, it causes PGAD sensation. So they have a vestibulitis. And that treats that. So you need to figure out what the trigger or triggers, 'cause often there's more than one trigger, you know, and then treat that. And the other thing is that stress will always increase those triggers. So no matter what the physical trigger is for PGAD, it is so important to have therapy, to have stress therapy, and how to deal with the stress in your life. Because no matter what it is, whenever stress occurs, it's going to trigger in and of itself the PGAD symptoms. So that, you know, having a multidisciplinary approach is so important. Typically with PGAD, it's not just one thing one thing. And, you know, those are your EDS patients who have issues. That, that's huge. But the stress is important, and the, you know, everything else— examining the full person and caring for the full person is so important.

[59:42] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And I think that's an important point about stress, because any of the mast cell conditions especially, which of course interstitial cystitis also can be, you know, a mast cell condition— so if you have any, any painful condition, also stress is going to exacerbate it. And I remember one of my doctors quite I had a few, but this is many, many years ago, but I did notice that stress made my pain worse. And she said, "Well, that's because it's in your head." And they knew I had a Tarlov cyst at that time, but she kept telling me, "Nope, that is absolutely not the cause of your problems." But your Tarlov cyst was incidental.

[1:00:16] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Right.

[1:00:16] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: No, that was a joke. I'm sorry. So I wanna spend 2 minutes on IC because I have a personal research effort on IC. So interstitial cystitis is a real phenomenon, but it has to have on cystoscopy this ulcer at the dome of the bladder called a Hunner ulcer. And I have to say that Hunner ulcers are pretty rare and that a lot of women are given an IC diagnosis, interstitial cystitis diagnosis, who don't have Hunner ulcers. And I'm just going to say to you and to them and to everybody on this planet, they don't really have IC. Okay?

[1:00:52] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

[1:00:53] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: They get their bladders with nerve stimulation of every drug on earth, lidocaine and various other things. They get nerve stimulation of their nerve in their ankle because that somehow helps IC, but it doesn't. And they just go on and on on IC treatments. What is totally amazing is the vast majority of those people have the vestibulodynia of the neuroproliferative kind, and that's the true basis for their condition. And it's basically a referral system. So when we numb, you know how you numbed your Carlos cyst, we have the ability to numb the vestibule. Okay. And then we have the women with IC urinate in the time that their vestibule is now numb. And they said, oh my gosh, I don't have the urges. They don't have the frequency. And then when the numbing wears off, they go back to having it. And the IC symptoms go away when we do the vestibule, the treatment for neuroproliferative vestibulodynia and on and on. There is a substantial number of people with IC who are diagnosed with IC who don't have IC, who really have other explanations. The pelvic floor, for example. Yeah. You know, the outside the bladder concept of IC is really strong.

[1:02:07] Dr. Sue Goldstein: And we've published on the relationship between vestibulodynia and what people have been diagnosed as IC. It's enough that, so I think one of the cues is if you keep being given different treatments for your IC and it's not working, it's because you don't have IC. I imagine that most of those treatments probably work if you actually have the Hunner ulcers and have IC. But, you know, it's, it's like the PGAD. We had a woman who came and said, I wanted my clitoris— she wanted her clitoris cut off because that's where she was, you know, she was— her arousal was so painful. But she had no physical arousal in her clitoris. And the problem is that the pain she was feeling is in her, in her brain. So when you talked before about someone saying it's in your head, we differentiate between it's in your head, which means, you know, psychological, versus in brain, which is you have stuff that goes on in this area that is your brain. It is in your head, but it has chemicals and its structures. And, you know, you may sense that you're having pain or arousal in another part of your body, but without your brain, you're never going to feel pain because you actually— it's your brain that processes it.

[1:03:09] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: I want to say one thing about the woman who wished to have her clitoris removed. Luckily, she didn't get her clitoris removed, but there is another another woman who did find a doctor to remove the clitoris. And as you have phantom limb pain when you remove the leg, she now has phantom clitoral pain because the original pain was never coming. It was perceived as coming from the clitoris, but physically wasn't coming. She had one of these Tarlov cyst things, and that was the true basis for her clitoral pain.

[1:03:40] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wow, that's horrible. So for people who aren't familiar with phantom limb pain, and I actually I had a patient not long ago who had CRPS who had an amputation, and I was like, she made the decision completely independent of me, and I was really concerned, you know, is this actually going to help? She had very, very severe CRPS, or complex regional pain syndrome. But yes, after people have an amputation, they can feel a painful limb that's no longer there. So how do you treat that limb that's no longer there? And Sue, I really appreciate you explaining the difference between the brain versus the head, because of course that is where we sense everything anyway, right? We sense everything up here in our, in our head. So, at the same time that, you know, saying, well, no, that pain is in your head, it's like, well, yeah, that's where you're feeling it is in your brain, which your brain of course is inside your head, but that doesn't mean that there isn't something physiologically going on.

[1:04:31] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Getting back to the biopsychosocial model, the other, thing that we haven't talked about with the POTS and with EDS and with IC is the allergies. There's an awful lot of allergies, allergic responses to medicines, allergic responses to foods, allergic responses to pollens outside in the air. Probably the fire in Los Angeles is bringing all types of other allergies into play.

[1:04:57] Dr. Sue Goldstein: But that doesn't mean everybody who has allergies has any kind of mast cell disease. I mean, I have pollen allergies and I don't have any other mast cell aberrant activity. So I don't want people thinking, well, I, you know, I sneeze from ragweed, so therefore I must have EDS. It doesn't look like that, but it's this constellation symptoms. And I'm sorry I cut you off, but I just, I always worry about people hearing about one thing and say, oh my God, I've got to have all these other things.

[1:05:20] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

[1:05:21] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Well, there are even other mast cells that we haven't talked about, like Raynaud's disease. That's another common issue. So they have their fingers and they go into, well, you're not going to get this in San Diego, but like in Boston or Colorado, the tips of the fingers become white and purple and it's very painful. And they have vasospasm. Spasm based on cold. And that's also highly related to aberrant mast cell condition syndromes.

[1:05:47] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And when you were mentioning some of the different allergies, I think an important one that I discovered for me was soap. And especially, you know, we wash all parts of our body, and some parts of our body, like, you know, if you think about the perineum, which is basically the— our private area, you know, if we're not using a soap that is very, very gentle and fragrance-free and all of that, you know, for a lot of people that can cause a lot of problems. And that's a simple change that that people can make.

[1:06:13] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Or the detergent you wash your clothes in, or the toilet paper you use, or the sheets you sleep on. We had one woman who—

[1:06:19] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: So we had a woman, yeah, if it's the same woman, she was at home, she was fine. She went into a hotel, which used a different toilet paper, and then she got severe pain during intercourse as a result.

[1:06:34] Dr. Sue Goldstein: But you have to have that predisposition. I mean, most people Most people don't. So most people aren't going to have these kinds of reactions. We don't know what the genetic predisposition is to have these mast cell diseases. And that's something for the future. I mean, we work closely with an allergist here in San Diego who's very interested in mast cell. You know, there are people around the country who have an interest in mast cell or in, you know, one of the specific things like the EDS or vestibulodynia, things like that. But we just don't know enough about these diseases, but we're learning constantly. I mean, when we, we looked at our vestibulectomy population and more than half of them had multiple other mast cell aberrant conditions, not just the vestibulodynia. And I'm convinced if we had done a more thorough questioning of all like 20 comorbidities that they probably, every one of them had at least one. But as I say, it doesn't mean that everyone's gonna have things, but you have to go through life assuming, well, you know, I could react to something, I need to think twice. We had a woman who put hair dye on her pubic hair. Not a very smart thing to do, but like, why would you even want to do that? I don't know. But, you know, so be sensible and live your life in moderation and hopefully everything will be okay.

[1:07:50] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. And it's surprising sometimes the, the changes that you can see. So I treat a lot of people with mast cell activation syndrome, of course, because I treat a lot of people with, with EDS or HSD or hypermobility spectrum disorders. And when you stabilize the mast cell activation syndrome, we stabilize the mast cell, often Oftentimes, they're— what was labeled anyway as interstitial cystitis or bladder pain, was probably bladder pain is probably more accurate in that, in most of those instances. But oftentimes, they report that those symptoms get dramatically improved.

[1:08:22] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Better.

[1:08:22] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Yeah.

[1:08:23] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Awesome. Yeah, very cool.

[1:08:26] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, we're probably getting pretty close to the end of our time here.

[1:08:29] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: And did you have any other pearl questions from the individuals?

[1:08:33] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, well, we did have another question about This question here, this person asked, any tips for talking to a potential partner about pain with penetration? It's kind of hard to work this into a conversation in the early phases of dating.

[1:08:49] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Wow, that's a great question. That's a good question for a therapist.

[1:08:55] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: But yeah, no, I think, I think that you don't have to have traditional penile-vaginal sort of sexuality. You can have all types lots of other sexualities that end up in orgasm without the need to have pain.

[1:09:12] Dr. Sue Goldstein: But you still have to have the conversation for why you're not having penile-vaginal pain, you know, vaginal activity. I mean, I think, you know, you can say, I really, you know, I really care about you and I want to be honest with you and I have these issues and I'm working on it. And hopefully at some point, you know, I will no longer have pain with penetration. But I'm being honest because I'm hoping this relationship will stay. I mean, we see patients clients that I remember this as the partner, the husband said, now that she knows what's wrong with her and she's going to have surgery, I haven't wanted to be in this relationship for a long time, but I didn't want to leave her while she was struggling. But now that I know she's going to get better, I'm leaving her. I was like, whoa, you know, you would think that now that she's better, he can say, okay, now we can have a more normal life. But I think being honest is so important because we see too many people who don't want to get to that conversation. And so they break off the relationship before they get to the intimacy portion of their life. And they keep, you know, and then eventually they wind up not even going out at all and then not even going out with the girls or the guys because they talk about their dating history and they wind up staying home and, you know, being on their mom's couch. And that's no way to live. So if you're in a relationship with somebody that you really think might be a long-term relationship, I think you open with, I wanna be honest and this is what's going on. And, you know, I hope that you'll help me through this and I'm hoping that I will, you know, come out the other side. I don't expect that I will be like this forever. Forever because I'm seeking treatment or whatever, but I just want you to know now, and this is why, can we think about alternative forms of intimacy for the moment?

[1:10:44] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: You know, I had a woman who had horrible dyspareunia or painful penetration, and they wanted a family, and they couldn't have a family in the context with penile vaginal intercourse, but they did intrauterine insemination. She went to, under anesthesia, they did his sperm while under anesthesia. They administered the semen into the uterus through the cervix and she had a child. And that's all they wanted in the first place. At least from her point of view, that's what she wanted. So there are ways, that's the point. I think being honest and realizing that if you can find the sex detective sort of person who is familiar with many alternatives to the unusual, then you can, you can get help.

[1:11:34] Dr. Sue Goldstein: And a partner who's supportive.

[1:11:36] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. And I, and I think the conversation with that, with a therapist and what you said, Sue, especially at the beginning of that question, I think is, is really, really important. And I do want to just say, 'cause I feel like it was mentioned a couple of times, and I just want people to know what a vestibulectomy is because that's, that's like an extreme treatment, right? That of course probably most people don't end up having. But I, I, if you wouldn't mind just very quickly before we wrap up explaining what that is and why you might do it.

[1:12:01] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: My honor and privilege. So it's basically the size of a thumb that goes around the opening to the vagina. It's not an awful lot of tissue. So the good news is if it's infiltrated with nerves and mast cells, which is the similar thing to EDS and endometriosis and IC and all these other things, it's an infiltrative mast cell problem. You can remove the tissue because there's no excess infiltration in the vaginal canal. There's no excess infiltration in the vulva. So you have this sort of cool opportunity to rid the body of the 1 million nociceptors that when you tickle, it just burns. So while it's an extreme therapy, the fact is there's no medical therapy for dealing with too many nerves and mast cells in a tissue. It's infiltrated. I mean, you either deal with it with alternative sexual events, or you deal with it by removing it? That's—

[1:12:56] Dr. Sue Goldstein: yeah. So in 2025, surgery is the only treatment for neuroproliferative, which is the excess nerves and mast cells, vestibulodynia. But it's only for that. We would not use vestibulectomy for any other disease state, at least at this time that we're aware of. So it's wonderful to have a treatment, and, you know, obviously they have to heal postoperatively, but our patients, you know, after healed, even the gynecologist can't tell they've had this removed because, because the tissue is so small. Yeah. And, you know, once the pain is gone, you live, live the rest of your life perfectly normal. You can, you know, deliver children, all of this. So there's, there's no downside other than obviously you having surgery and you have to recover from surgery.

[1:13:38] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And that's a subset of people that have vestibulodynia or pain in the vestibule. This is a subset of those people that have the nerve.

[1:13:46] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: 30 different reasons for Sure, sure. This is one of them. Okay. But it's highly associated with POTS and EDS and endometriosis and allergies and Raynaud's and skin conditions and asthma and sleep disorders. And you can go on and on. There's just lots of them.

[1:14:03] Dr. Sue Goldstein: We see it a lot in our practice because gynecologists are only really comfortable taking out little pieces of the vestibule in general. So there are only a few people in the United States that are really comfortable doing a complete vestibulectomy with vaginal advancement flap. So we have a lot of patients that come from all over over to us.

[1:14:19] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I'm sure.

[1:14:20] Dr. Sue Goldstein: And so that's why it's something we see a lot of, because if you have hormonal issues, it's more likely that your local doctor can help you with that, right? If you have spine issues, you'll often come to us because most people don't understand that as well. So we're a tertiary referral center at San Diego Sexual Medicine. We're seeing people with the stuff that's too difficult to be dealt with by the local doctor, too challenging with— in terms of time management, in terms of knowledge, in terms of equipment, whatever it is. and so we always say we treat the zebras of sexual medicine. And when people call, they say, I really weird stuff. I don't know if you want to see me. Oh, Dr. Goldstein thrives on patients with really weird stuff. you know, the way I put it simply is if you had erectile dysfunction and Viagra would treat you, you wouldn't be coming across the country to see us. We're seeing the other people.

[1:15:04] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, yeah, absolutely. That totally makes sense. And, and I like to finish every episode with a hypermobility hack. so can you, give us like a— you know, you've given us of course a lot of great little clinical pearls, but do you have any other kind of quick wins for people?

[1:15:22] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Where's your ear, when—

[1:15:24] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Yeah, you do it. So when I don't know what's going on in a person's list of complaints, I ask them what they did when they were a kid. So EDS people are very commonly gymnastics-oriented because their bendy bodies, which is your show, is so apparent. And they can do all these back things and they can do gymnastics seriously. So if someone gives me a history that when I was young, I did ballerina gymnastics, I did these dance things because I was so mobile. I said, oh, really? Tell me more. And yeah, if it's possible, I have them stand up, put their flat feet on the ground, and they could easily touch their palms of hands right to the thing or move their elbows in odd positions. And I said, okay, this is orienting me towards a mast cell aberrant condition. Let me ask you more specific questions. Then we get into IC and we get into pain with penetration. So now the thing is, for those individuals who have pain, we're now doing 4 millimeter. I don't know if you can imagine what 4 millimeters, but it's not any more than that. Little biopsies of their hymen. And the beauty of biopsying the hymen is because it's easy to put a lidocaine injection into the flap. The hymen is just a flap on the side of the vestibule. It's a vestibule tissue. So by numbing the vestibule, it's easy to take a little biopsy of it. And in a few weeks, I can tell them that they have too many nerves and mast cells. It's really an awesome opportunity to get a glimpse into the problem. Anyway.

[1:17:06] Dr. Sue Goldstein: We talked about everything changing. We only started doing that, I think, in October. So we're constantly changing our practice, you know, to help. I don't have any— I don't have any hacks for you for EDS. I'm sorry, I'm not— I'm not really— not, not my specialty per se. I love seeing patients, I love helping patients, I love teaching patients, I love teaching providers, but I'm— I leave that to him.

[1:17:28] Dr. Linda Bluestein: You, you already gave us a lot of hacks, and I just want to circle back to the hymen biopsy. Is this something that you can do even if the hymen is No, no, no, it's not intact, but it's still there.

[1:17:42] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Intact just means that it's not one solid surface across. There's always hymen there unless until somebody surgically removes it.

[1:17:48] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Linda, you will have your hymen until you are 6 feet under. Just going to tell you.

[1:17:55] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Okay. Okay. And if we have clinicians listening to this, you do not want to do a biopsy of the vestibule. That would be extremely painful. And that's why, since we now know that the hymen is the same tissue as the vestibule, has the same nerves and mast cells, cells, and it's, we can do the biopsy from that and get the same information to know that this is what's causing the pain in the vestibule.

[1:18:14] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So. Okay.

[1:18:15] Dr. Sue Goldstein: That's my guess.

[1:18:16] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: If you're going to do this, you have to send it to a lab that measures the immunohistochemical staining for nerves and mast cells. You're not going to get it on just a regular pathology examination. Right.

[1:18:27] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Our hospital sends it out to a specialty lab.

[1:18:29] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Which is really challenging. I try to get them to do that whenever someone's going to have a colonoscopy or an upper endoscopy. And sometimes they do it. Yeah. Sometimes they do it. They don't. It's, yeah, it's quite frustrating.

[1:18:40] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: So we have colon biopsies, we have endometrial biopsies, we have a lot of other tissue biopsies showing the same thing we see in the vestibule— the infiltrate of nerves and mast cells.

[1:18:50] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Fascinating.

[1:18:50] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Now the next thing we need to do is to figure out how to stop all that so we can— so no one has to suffer from this in the future.

[1:18:55] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right, absolutely. And speaking of, you know, your continued efforts at research and all the amazing things that, that both of you are doing, if you could just finish up by telling us, you know, if there's anything special that you're up to that in terms of research or projects and also where we can find you.

[1:19:12] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Sue, you—

[1:19:14] Dr. Sue Goldstein: well, a lot of, a lot of our research recently has been in regenerative therapies, in particular men with erectile dysfunction, looking at devices that can potentially regenerate the quality of the tissue in the erection chambers. We're still doing research for women with orgasm issues. We're always doing chart reviews. That's a lot of our research we do with students so that they have experience doing, doing research research looking at our patient database, and compare, you know, whether we're comparing them to mast cells and nerves or looking at the surgery that our spine surgeon does. We work, we work very closely with Dr. Cho Kim of Excel Spine. so we, so we have a lot of different kinds of research projects, but you can find us both at San Diego Sexual Medicine. you can find us online at sdsm.info. Lots of information. We have a huge website. Give us a call at 619-265-8865. We do offer 10-minute courtesy calls. They're all, they're all with Dr. Goldstein. It's fact-finding. He's not going to diagnose and treat you, but it's how we start it, and he figures out what testing we would do. And then based on that, you can decide whether, you know, I want to come into, you know, come into us. But San Diego Sexual Medicine. And thank you for having me on today.

[1:20:27] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: And Linda, thank you. Oh my gosh, what information we have shared. It's fabulous.

[1:20:31] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, I'm so grateful to both of you. It was So great to get to do this. And I take it I'll get to see both of you next month at the conference. Yes, absolutely.

[1:20:38] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Go ISHWISH.

[1:20:39] Dr. Sue Goldstein: We're both speaking as well.

[1:20:40] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I figured that you were. So yeah, I'm really excited about that. This is just, you know, that organization and what both of you are doing is just so incredibly important for people and quality of life. And I'm just so grateful to you for taking the time to speak with me, 'cause I know you're both extremely busy and it was so great to to see you again.

[1:21:02] Dr. Irwin Goldstein: Thank you so much. Really.

[1:21:02] Dr. Sue Goldstein: Thank you.

[1:21:08] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That was certainly an interesting conversation with Dr. Goldstein and his wife, Sue Goldstein. They are such an incredible wealth of knowledge. And I hope you found this information really, really helpful for you or someone that you know, or if you're a clinician for your practice. And I want to thank you for listening to this week's episode of the Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD podcast. You can help us spread the word about joint hypermobility and related disorders by leaving a review and telling a friend or family member about the podcast. This helps raise awareness about these complex and often underrecognized conditions. If you'd like to dig deeper, you can meet with me one-on-one by checking out the available options on the services page of my website at hypermobilitymd.com. You can also find me, Dr. Linda Bluestein on Instagram, Facebook, TikTok, Twitter, or LinkedIn @HypermobilityMD. You can find human content by producing team at Human Content Pods on TikTok and Instagram. You can find full video episodes up every week on YouTube at Bendy Bodies Podcast. To learn about the Bendy Bodies program disclaimer and ethics policy, submission verification and licensing terms, and HIPAA release terms, or to reach out with any questions, please visit bendybodyspodcast.com. Bendy Bodies Podcast is a Human Content production. Thank you for being a part of our community, and we'll catch you next time on the Bendy Bodies Podcast.
