---
num: 132
title: Reversing Brain Fog & Inflammation with Dr. Ilene Ruhoy (Ep 132)
date: '2025-02-13'
duration: 1h 24m
description: >-
  In this episode of the Bendy Bodies Podcast, Dr. Linda Bluestein welcomes Dr.
  Ilene Ruhoy, a board-certified neurologist and environmental toxicologist, for
  an in-depth discussion on brain fog, cognitive dysfunction, and chronic
  fatigue in conditions like Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS), Mast Cell Activation
  Syndrome (MCAS), and dysautonomia. Dr. Ruhoy shares insights on the immune
  system’s role in neurological symptoms, the impact of mast cell activation,
  and the role of treatments like peptides, IVIG (intravenous gammaglobulin),
  plasmapheresis, and immune modulators. They also discuss the hidden effects of
  histamine on the brain, how sensory sensitivity contributes to fatigue, and
  the role of regenerative medicine in connective tissue healing. This episode
  is packed with cutting-edge research and practical solutions for improving
  cognitive function and energy levels.
tags:
  - EDS
  - Brain Fog
  - MCAS
  - Dysautonomia
  - Inflammation
  - Long COVID
  - ME/CFS
  - Integrative Medicine
audioUrl: >-
  https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH3414544882.mp3?updated=1738958295
videoUrl: 'https://youtu.be/Vf-2j6yZqLU'
snippets: []
guests:
  - Dr. Ilene Ruhoy
guestImages: []
---
[00:40] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Welcome back, every bendy body, to the Bendy Bodies Podcast with your host and founder, Dr. Linda Bluestein, the Hypermobility MD. I am so excited to chat today with my very dear friend and colleague, Dr. Eileen Ruhoy. She and I are good friends, so you never know where this conversation is going to go, but I guarantee you that it will be interesting. Dr. Ruhoy is a board-certified neurologist with a PhD in environmental toxicology. She completed a fellowship in integrative medicine with Dr. Andrew Weil at the University of Arizona. Her interests include connective tissue disorders such as Ehlers-Danlos syndromes, autoimmune neurologic disorders, neuromuscular disorders, intracranial vascular and pressure disorders, infection-associated neurologic conditions such as long COVID, ME/CFS, and PANS/PANDAS, traumatic and inflammatory brain injury, mitochondrial disease, neurodegeneration, and exposure illness. Dr. Ruhoy has a private concierge practice in Seattle, Washington, and has become a well-sought-after speaker on the role of connective tissue in neurologic disease. I am so excited about this conversation. Dr. Ruhoy and I spoke about brain fog and cognitive dysfunction quite a few episodes ago, back in episode 90, and we'll link that in the show notes. Finally, we're gonna talk today about treatment of cognitive dysfunction, and I'm sure we're going to dig into all kinds of other topics as well. Cognitive problems are so common with the triad: mast cell activation syndrome, dysautonomia, and the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes, hypermobility spectrum disorders. So this is a really important conversation. As always, this information is for educational purposes only and is not a substitute for personalized medical advice. Stick around until the very end so you don't miss any of our special hypermobility hacks. Here we go. All right, so excited to finally chat with Dr. Ruhoy again. We've been trying to do this for such a long time, and I can't believe we're finally going to get to chat.

[02:34] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: I, I agree. I'm very excited to be here. Thank you for inviting me again.

[02:39] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Of course, of course. So we talked— well, I didn't want to think about how long ago this was, but we had an episode about brain fog or cognitive dysfunction, and I want to make sure that people go and check that episode out, which was episode 90. That was such a great conversation with Dr. Ruhoy and so much in-depth information that we really thought we needed to come back and have another conversation about treatments of brain fog and also talk about your upcoming book, of course.

[03:06] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Yes.

[03:07] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So when it comes to cognitive dysfunction, and we're gonna use that term and/or brain fog, is that pretty fair to use those interchangeably, do you think, or?

[03:17] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: I think it depends upon the patient. Sometimes it's not synonymous, but sometimes it is. And I often say that brain fog is a patient experience. So very commonly when patients report brain fog, I will ask them further questions as to what that means. And I will go down the list of concerns of cognitive impairment kind of questions like, do you get lost in familiar places? Do you forget familiar names? Do you forget what the conversation is about? Do you have loss of time or loss of awareness? So just to sort of make sure that there is truly no cognitive impairment in sort of a more classic sense that they're experiencing, but usually not. Usually it's this brain fog, which is sort of like thinking through a fog, basically. So a very sluggish kind of feeling. And most importantly, they feel fatigued from intense cognitive work. So being asked to learn something new or being asked to follow, you know, a chapter in a book or a television show, even watching a screen, can create a real sense of just, you know, that their brain is just no longer functioning and they have to close their eyes in a dark room and rest.

[04:20] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And does that seem to help, taking a break like that?

[04:22] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: It does, actually. I mean, it doesn't completely resolve the fatigue symptom itself, because of course, that's one of their underlying symptoms of whatever their illness is. And so it's very easily triggered. There's a very low threshold for those kinds of symptoms to recur, but they will get some respite for sure if they're allowed to just sort of lie in a dark room without any sensory stimuli, close their eyes. I mean, so one of the problems when there is brain fog and any kind of cognitive challenge is that the brain is very sensitive to sensory stimuli, to external stimuli. So things like noise and things like light and sound. And, you know, patients can't be in a very crowded room, for example. And if there's a lot of ambient noise, they can't hear the person that's talking to them or they are triggered by the person that's talking to them. And it's usually got nothing to do with the person themselves, but rather the sound of their voice, you know? And so, and if there's a lot of fragrances in the air, I mean, I have patients who tell me they can't go to malls any longer because the stores have a lot of fragrance that are sprayed into the air. And so that can be very bothersome to them. So the brain just becomes very sensitive, very hypersensitive to just sensory stimuli from the environment.

[05:37] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's really interesting, 'cause I'm thinking also about our patients that have hyperacusia or, you know, sensitivity to sounds. And I happen to be one of those people, and I'm gonna share something a little more personal. My husband's chewing, like, there are times where it drives me nuts.

[06:03] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: I totally understand.

[05:55] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And it's like, I love him dearly and he doesn't listen to the podcast, so it's okay to share this, I think. Yeah, yeah. But it's fascinating because in, there was a French study that looked at the prevalence of different things in people that had, you know, conditions that look like Ehlers-Danlos syndromes. And then they looked at other musculoskeletal clinics and that hyperacusia was one of the things that showed up on that list. So it was really interesting.

[06:24] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Yeah, for sure. I do think that connective tissue disorders in general are a risk factor for a lot of these things. And so I think it's not surprising to me to learn that a lot of these clinics and other groups that see a lot of patients with particular concerns of like hyperacusis, but is that they see a lot of connective tissue disorder patients 'cause it does seem to be a risk factor for these symptoms.

[06:48] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And I'm glad you mentioned fatigue right off the bat because I know before I opened my clinic, I really did not realize how many people would, really be struggling with severe, severe fatigue. And with a lot of my patients, I'm finding that their pain has gotten a lot better, but their fatigue really persists. So yeah, so I'm really excited to get some ideas from you for, you know, for managing that. So, so in terms of medications that can help with cognitive dysfunction, brain fog, fatigue, things like that, what are some things that come to mind?

[07:23] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: So I usually start with, you know, the usual suspects that I think a lot of doctors do with regards to just mast cell management. And, you know, usually my triad that I start most patients on, if not all, LDN, ketotifen, and cromelin, just to stabilize the mast cells. I personally, and I, I probably am in the minority of this opinion, but don't think that these symptoms are related to or at least not primarily related to a histamine concern. So I don't, I don't really find a whole lot of benefit from the antihistamines in my patient population, which I recognize is skewed, right? I mean, who's gonna see a neurologist if they don't really need to? So it's, that's probably the reason why. But, so I do a lot of mast cell stabilization and I do a lot of immunotherapy kind of approaches because I see this as an immune dysregulation problem. You know, a lot of these illnesses are what we considered post-infectious illnesses and obviously long COVID and ME/CFS has long been thought to be a post-infectious illness or post-exposure illness, as I like to call it, because it's not only just infection that we're exposed to, but— so I don't— while I see a very strong mast cell component, I don't see it as necessarily a primary histamine problem. You know, so in fact, most of the symptoms are, you know, cannot be related to classic histamine kind of responses. So I find stabilizing the mast cells and regulating the immune system is way more effective than, than the antihistamine approach.

[08:51] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And when you're talking about regulating the immune system, are you talking about IVIG or other things?

[08:57] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: So immunomodulators, and I definitely start with the more broad spectrum, as I refer to them, which is IVIG. I do a lot of plasmapheresis. And again, because these are, you know, there's a lot of targeted immunotherapies available these days, the JAK-STAT inhibitors, the tyrosine kinase inhibitors, and so on. And then I like the old guard still because we just know a lot about them, but they are, they do suppress the immune system fairly significantly. And so I try to avoid them for the most part, but I will go to them if we have to, meaning like the cyclophosphamide, the CellCept, the methotrexate, the azathioprine. You know, there's so much data on them that, you know, I think doctors are well armed with what to look for. And in terms of surveillance of labs and even side effects, you know, we've used them for decades now. But, you know, the targeted immunotherapies I think have great promise and I'm finding great use of them when I need to go there. But I really get a lot of traction for patients with IVIG and plasmapheresis. I find them to be a lot safer with a lot less toxicity concerns and just, and easier to do for, you know, it's not easy in the sense of, you know, insurance approval, of course, but just easier to just get done for the patient.

[10:11] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And tell me more about the plasmapheresis, like what, what, who's a good candidate for that and how does that work in terms of the number of times that you might need to do it and some of the details of that.

[10:23] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: So plasmapheresis, apheresis is sort of an umbrella term and there's lots of different types of machines and some machines have particular filters where they filter out a particular parameter that's in the plasma. We use a centrifugation system. So we basically take out, we take out the blood, it's centrifuged, then it's separated and we remove the plasma and we don't return it. So it's not filtered in return like some of the other machines will do. There's no exchange as it used to be, or it still is called in some clinical scenarios where it's a plasma exchange. And so you get plasma from like the blood bank and it's, it is an exchange of plasma. But we just do where we remove the plasma and the volume is replaced with albumin, which is the natural protein of the body. And albumin itself has anti-inflammatory properties. So, and then, so we infuse the albumin and we, and the body eventually just makes, renews the plasma component. And so what we find is that removing the plasma does a lot of great things. So as you probably know, it's an FDA-approved treatment for autoimmune diseases. We use it for several different autoimmune neurological disorders, myasthenia gravis just being one of them. So it's a treatment that's well known to remove autoantibodies that circulate in the plasma. But the plasma also has other things that is removed by the centrifugation process, including a lot of the mast cell mediators, a lot of the inflammatory mediators, circulating viral RNA. It removes obviously the autoantibodies. It also removes extracellular ATP, which can happen from mitochondrial failure. And I'm finding more and more that that's a component of the fatigue that a lot of long COVID and ME/CFS patients will experience. In fact, I do muscle biopsies and I have basically seen 100% of them be abnormal at this point. It's too few of an end to say definitively that it's always the case, but it's so this is sort of an exciting development that I think, you know, deserves further looking into. But so when the mitochondria start to fail, the ATP is extruded from the cell. And obviously, as we all know, the powerhouse of the cell, mitochondria. But so intracellular ATP is critical for the functioning of the cell, but extracellular ATP is actually toxic to the cell. So the fact that it, and it's got a very short half-life, so it's not like it's accumulating at, you know, crazy amounts, but regardless, it's in the plasma. And so it's being removed along with plasmapheresis. And so I think that's one of the reasons why patients do so well with plasmapheresis. With regards to how many sessions you need, so first of all, it's not covered by insurance, which is a problem because these are obviously off-label indications despite the fact that it's an FDA-approved treatment. So it's not cheap because it's a 3-hour treatment. It's a big machine, requires a technically competent nurse. And so it's an expensive treatment to administer, and so it's an expensive treatment to get. So it's— and it's not covered by insurance. So that's an obstacle that I wish I can fix tomorrow, but I can't. And I'm thinking of ways to do so. But, and then it's— it's 6 treatments is the initial protocol. So it's 2 a week for 3 weeks, basically. And, that's sort of the recommended protocol to start the plasmapheresis. And then some patients, you know, in 6 months' time feel like their symptoms are recurring. And so they come back for what we refer to as sort of this maintenance or booster session, which is usually just 2. And then, you know, they seem to do well thereafter. In fact, half of them don't need that maintenance/booster session.

[13:52] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, really?

[13:53] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: They seem to just continue to do well. And largely because after those 6 sessions, I tend to, you know, continue with immunotherapy. So immunosupport, sometimes I'll keep them on IVIG at lower dosages for a period of time. Other times I'll, you know, work on their mast cells as I had been from the very beginning. But now the medications seem to have more efficacy because we've sort of cleaned out what the medications might have to contend with when they're taken. Because the things that were in the body floating in the plasma that were presumably causing the problem are no longer present. And so it seems that it may, it certainly makes IVIG work a lot faster. That I have seen over and over and over again, 'cause I do a lot of IVIG. Usually if there's a few sessions, it doesn't have to be 6 actually. If you're going to do IVIG, if you have a few sessions of plasmapheresis beforehand, the IVIG seems to be a lot more efficacious and work at a lot faster rate. Oftentimes you have to wait months before you know if it's helpful at all. With plasmapheresis first, then you don't have to necessarily wait months. You usually know within 1 to 2 months if IVIG has been helpful. Is generally helpful. So I think it just helps also make medications work better because again, we're just sort of, you know, I hate the word cleansing 'cause it just sort of, you know, there's connotations to that word, but we really are cleaning the body of the unhealthy plasma products. And so I think that's a key to initiation of successful treatment in my opinion.

[15:26] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And I'm glad you circled back to like, you know, what happens after the sessions are over? 'Cause that's what I was thinking as well. When the body, it makes more plasma, wouldn't it just create more of the things that were causing the problem in the first place? The plasma, or the part that separates from the red cells when you spin it down, right? Just so for people who don't know what plasma is. So, and then in terms of those medications that you mentioned, so it's the ketotifen and the cromelin and the low-dose naltrexone, there's some people probably that with that regimen alone are doing sufficiently better. I take it.

[16:01] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Oh yes, absolutely. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean, it's amazing, you know, some patients really do well with those medications, but some patients, and I think largely because of the mast cell activity, you know, are very sensitive to these medications. And so, and I know, you know, we've talked about on the Mastermind list and the group that we're both part of, you know, the role of the excipients, and that definitely plays a role. But I have found that, that a lot of patients who have had issues with the excipients or the preservatives or the fillers or what may be in the medication itself or even the supplements that they take, that that is less of a problem after plasmapheresis. And I think it's because we're removing a lot of those mast cell mediators. And it's important to note that, you know, I think that a lot of those mediators, you know, there's 1,200 mediators of those mast cells, so it's well beyond histamine. But a lot of those mediators serve to just provoke more mast cell activity. And so I think removing those mediators just sort of gives those mast cells a break, basically, like a rest for a period of time. Obviously not, you know, permanently, but for a period of time. And so, if we can then go in after the plasmapheresis and then further manage those mast cells as well as we can, I think it's giving the patients a fighting chance. And it's certainly what we see here in the clinic. It is, you know, and so that is ultimately our goal, right? Is to sort of just counteract all of this inflammatory response that the body is sort of encountering that is sort of creating this altered physiology that is causing their symptoms.

[17:30] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, and I think so many people are familiar with histamine being one of the mast cell mediators, and maybe tryptase, and maybe some of, you know, some of the other, you know, cytokines or, you know, proteases or things like that. But, but not 1,200 different things, right? It's kind of crazy.

[17:47] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: I mean, you can't, you can't test for all 1,200, right? So that's the problem, right? So you can test for a select few and then we get focused on those select few. And I think, you know, and that, and there's no other way around it, of course, 'cause we haven't developed assays for all the other mediators, you know? So I think that we tend to focus on those select few, which sometimes actually works well in the patient's interest, but oftentimes it doesn't.

[18:10] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm. And histamine itself, how does that affect the brain?

[18:15] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: So there are histaminergic neurons and there are H3 receptors that are unique to the central nervous system, believe it or not. So, you know, I always, and I, there isn't enough research to say definitively how it affects the brain. We know that the H3 has high affinity for histamine. We know that those receptors can modulate the level of histamine that is released in the brain. And so, you know, the antihistamines, we know also lower migraine threshold and lower seizure threshold, right? So I think histamine has a role, has a neuroprotective role. I know this is sacrilegious, wait, histamine does something good? Right. It's not always a foe. It can be a friend. And I think that's an important point. Obviously, with mast cell activation syndrome or disorder, histamine can be a big foe. It can certainly be an enemy, right? Because that's excessive then, right? But clearly, mast cells are meant to be our friend, meant to protect us. So hence, you know, there's a good role for histamine, right? So, and I think that's been lost in a lot of the talk about mast cell activation syndrome is that what really was the nature's intended role for histamine, right? And the fact there are histaminergic neurons and there are specific histamine receptors of the brain that are not found elsewhere. They're certainly not counteracted by all the antihistamines that are on the over-the-counter market these days. So there is something more, I think, that we should talk about and we should explore and we should research. And so, and I often think about all of the unopposed histamine floating around because everyone's on the H1, H2 blockers, you know? So I often wonder what is that doing? And those H3, they have such high affinity for histamine that they just are gobbling it up. And so, you know, how is it changing the function of those receptors and how is it changing the function of histamine in the brain? And, you know, and why are there so many neurologic manifestations, for example, of EDS patients with MCAS, you know? And so I think that the answer lies within that. And I have, you know, I have yet to know a definitive answer, but I plan on figuring it out.

[20:34] Dr. Linda Bluestein: If anyone's gonna figure it out, it's gonna be you, that's for sure. And in terms of the H3 receptors, we don't have a way to, we don't have any medications yet for H3 anti-histamines.

[20:48] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Well, there are some medications actually. One is not available in this country. It's betahistine or something like that. But then there's also Wakix, pitolisant, which is an H3 inverse agonist. So it does work on the H3, but it's got a different kind of receptor property. And I've actually tried to use it for my patient population. I cannot, it's actually indicated for narcolepsy. I cannot get it approved if there isn't a diagnosis of narcolepsy. And the few times that a patient paid out of pocket for it, one, it's expensive, but two, I didn't see a great response enough for me to feel like it was worth— worthy of the price that they were paying kind of thing. So, and to be fair, I don't think I let them try it long enough when I think about the physiology, but I, you know, I'm definitely considering sort of revisiting that, that question.

[21:44] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And speaking of medications and Masterminds, we, we get into such interesting conversations in there sometimes, and we've there's so much more talk nowadays about the GLP-1 receptor agonist, right? Like semaglutide, which goes by Wegovy or Ozempic. And I read someplace that that could be helpful for intracranial hypertension. And do you have any thoughts about that class of medications? Of course, you know, I think somebody shared today something about it can help with 60 different conditions, but also can make these 19 conditions worse, was the title of the article. So, of course, we don't have time to go into all of that.

[22:24] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: And I didn't, I didn't read it today, so I don't know.

[22:27] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And I didn't, I didn't read through the whole article, but I, I thought that was really, you know, really interesting. So any thoughts though about those medications? Because I know intracranial hypertension, or high pressure inside the head, is definitely something that you see in your patients as well, right? High and low.

[22:44] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Yes. And to be fair, I haven't used the GLP-1s to treat that just yet, but I will say that I've used GLP-1s for mast cell activation for excessive muscle activity. I've used it for fatigue. I think there's something to the glucose regulation, the glucose metabolism regulation of the glucagon-like peptides that really do seem to help a lot of patients' symptoms. And then I think about how that even speaks to the mitochondria, right? If we think about glucose and its regulation and how it's fed to the mitochondria, which loves that glucose molecule for the electron transport chain activity. Then, you know, I think that there's a connection there. It's just interesting to me that it has so many great properties, yet we don't talk about, you know, how mitochondria are in every cell, right, of every organ. And so, and it's interesting that it might treat elevated intracranial pressure, which, like I said, I haven't tried for, but I'm certainly willing to try it because a lot of my patients have refractory intracranial hypertension and don't tolerate with the classic meds like acetazolamide or even, 'cause you know, it's a sulfa drug and so then you can't even do the topiramate. And you know, sometimes I've been going to zonisamide for those patients, which they tend to tolerate a little bit better if they don't tolerate the acetazolamide, but it's not nearly as effective. So I've been trying different things. So yeah, I'm gonna try the GLP-1s now.

[24:09] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, that's just something that I came across the other day. And in terms of medications and/or supplements that can make cognitive, problems and/or brain fog worse? Are there certain things that come to mind?

[24:24] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: So I'm not a big fan of supplements, and I think everyone knows this about me. I think, you know, I think my patients are just too sick to waste their money on supplements. It's just not going to move the needle enough for them. I think supplements have a supportive role, and there will be a time in their recovery trajectory where I say, okay, let's support this process and support this momentum, and let's add some of these supplements. But early on, initially, I don't think it's useful. And in fact, when patients come to me with a list of the supplements they're taking, I usually say I cross them, I cross most of them off. I think that there's a couple of them, having said all that, there's a couple of them that I'm a big fan of. I like the quercetin and I like the luteolin for the mast cells. I think that they're very effective. I like things like palmitoylethanolamide, otherwise known as PEA, which really helps pain. It really helps inflammation. I like NAC.

[25:23] Dr. Linda Bluestein: N-acetylcysteine.

[25:23] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: It's a precursor of glutathione, which is really what I like, but it's glutathione itself, unless it's liposomal, though I'm still not sure, but it's not that bioavailable. So NAC is a precursor of glutathione, so I like that. And so other than that, I mean, to be honest, and magnesium, I think we're all magnesium deficient. So I think those are the only supplements that I would support early on, early on in treatment plans. I think supplements are a waste of money for the most part. I, I'm gonna say a lot of sacrilegious things these days.

[25:58] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That, that's okay. I, I love it. I think it's, very important because of course there are— it's just become the Wild West, right? You know, it is. And it's so frustrating because I'm sure you get this too. You have people coming in and they've, they've gone so many different places and they've in some cases tried some really crazy things.

[26:17] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Crazy things. I have to look stuff up half the time. You know, they'll say, what do you think about this? That this, that I was, I was told to do this. What do you think? And I have to like Google it. I'm like, I don't know. No, it is true. It is like the Wild West is a perfect way of, of describing it. And it, and it scares me for these patients, you know, because there's the potential of making things worse for sure.

[26:39] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right. Right.

[26:40] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Obviously you don't want that to happen to them, so you try to make reasonable decisions, you know? And you also try not to make them feel badly that they've been doing this for so long, right? I think for me, you know, I'm like a bleeding heart. Like, I always feel badly about everything. Like, "Oh, I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry." You know? So, I try very hard to say, like, "Listen, I don't think this has been harming you, but I think it's a waste of your money, and I don't think it's helping you." You know, so, but it is the Wild West and that's a little bit scary to me. And those things aren't even regulated. So, and there was a study a long time ago and I have to pull it out, but where they took a bottle of the same supplement and they put it through like a spectroscopy machine and they found that every capsule had a different amount of the compound that was labeled outside the body. In fact, some of the capsules had none of it.

[27:37] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, wow.

[27:37] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: So you don't really even know what you're buying sometimes. So you have to go with well-respected brands, and that can take time for people to vet out what is their extraction technology and their methodology. I mean, way back when, long time ago, I took a course in herbal formulations just to learn more because I did a whole integrative medicine fellowship and I was really into using plants as medicine. And I really am into herbal formulations and I like a lot of them. But part of the courses that we went to, like where they make these formulations, these tinctures. And so I learned a lot about extraction technology, which is why I say those terms like they're nothing to me. Extraction technology. Right.

[28:21] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

[28:21] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: But so I learned a lot about it. And while I don't remember a lot of the details because it was a long time ago, but it did make me realize that the methodology does matter. right? But I mean, obviously in science and medicine we know that, and that's why in papers the methodology is all, it has to be included, right? So, 'cause it does matter. It really does matter. So anyway, that's what I, that's what my thing is. Yeah.

[28:45] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And I feel like, you know, people with the triad or the pentad or, you know, how, whatever, whatever number you wanna, yeah. Septad, whatever, whatever you wanna include in terms of these overlapping conditions. it— they're such a vulnerable group because they're, you know, desperate for help. And the— they're such a poor match for our current medical culture where you're in and out of the appointment in 5 minutes.

[29:10] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: You're—

[29:11] Dr. Linda Bluestein: of course, I shouldn't— you're, you're in and out of the appointment in longer than 5 minutes, but you're with the doctor for about 5 minutes probably, and you have way too many concerns to really get those addressed well. So then you hear about these other things and and they probably seem quite attractive and a lot of them are very good. A lot of the charlatans are very good at, you know, promising cures and, you know, yeah, it's really, really tough. Speaking of, I read something recently about plasmalogen. Are you familiar with that? Is that—

[29:45] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: So lots of people have asked me about plasmalogens and I did a quick look. And to be honest, I don't yet have a formal opinion. I, it's one of, I, I have this long list. Like, so my book is like list of things that I have to do deep dives on just because I want to be sure that I guide patients appropriately. It's on my list.

[30:03] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. Sounds good. That sounds like another episode.

[30:08] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: We should do an episode on plasmalogens.

[30:10] Dr. Linda Bluestein: That would be great. That would be great. Okay, we're back with Dr. Eileen Ruhoy, who is an incredible neurologist and environmental toxicologist. She had her PhD that, that she got in environmental toxicology. And she has recently written a book which I am so eager to hear more about. I was very fortunate to get to preview it, but I would love to hear what's going on with the book, when it's coming out, and, and those kind of things.

[31:37] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Yeah, I'm real excited. So it's called Invisible No More, and, it does tackle like Long COVID, ME/CFS, and all the CEPTAD diagnoses as best as it can. It also— It's a real exciting project for me. It was actually, it's my first book. I've never authored a book myself. And it took a long time to write. So a lot of it was written over 2 years ago, believe it or not. So part of me worries about how even relevant some of what I say in it is, but I think there's still relevance regardless because chronic illness is chronic illness. And it comes out June 17th, 2025, though it is available for pre-order right now. And, I— it starts with my story, which, you know, I was a patient 10 years ago and no one would listen to me. And I went to lots of doctors because I wasn't feeling well and I couldn't figure out what was wrong. And I went to people that I knew who knew me, and I thought that they would take me seriously, but I was wrong. And, you know, in the end they saw me first as female and second as a neurologist. And so yeah, nobody took me seriously. And I just needed an MRI, and no one would order it for me because they didn't want to feed into my hysteria. And they told me that I knew too much, that I was stressed out, that I was anxious, that I missed my family. And I always often wonder if they would have said that to a man. Right. So I spent almost a year suffering, and things just kept getting worse. So, and my neuro exam was normal. I mean, it's, you know, unfortunately or fortunately, the diagnosis itself was different and easy to find, which I'll get to. But it was the same story where my exam was normal, my labs were normal, you know? And so, but symptoms just kept getting worse and no one was taking me seriously. And so finally, I just, I got to a point where I couldn't get out of bed in the morning. And so I went to an internist and I just cried and I said, please order me an MRI. And her words were, you know, "When a neurologist asks for an MRI of the brain, you order an MRI of the brain." And so she did. And then when I came out of the MRI machine, the tech said, "Go right to the ER. The radiologist called. You need to go to the ER." And that's sort of where it all began. But I'm so angry because that almost year that I wasted trying to get someone to believe me really did have consequences. And that's sort of what I go into in the book. And so I, you know, and then when I sort of was done with my journey and I opened up a private practice, I realized like, I just can't allow that to happen to other people. And while clearly my patient population, their diagnosis is not obvious on an MRI of the brain, I know what it's like not to be believed. I know what it's like not to be taken seriously. And I know what it's like to be told like, oh, you're just anxious, you just have anxiety. And so, I'd never do that to patients, and I meet them where they are, and I believe what they tell me unless they give me a reason not to, which really has maybe happened once in my entire career. So, I find that when you believe a patient, like, things just get done. Like, there's a therapeutic relationship that automatically occurs, and then you take— you go on that journey with that patient of trying to figure out what's going on. And that's the part I love. You know, and to be honest, like, I was a little burnt out out on medicine, you know, but this has sort of renewed my, my passion for it, right? I love neurology again. I love medicine again. I love working with patients again. And so I think this is why there's such burnout because doctors aren't given the time to really connect with their patients any longer. And I know a lot of patients like to complain about doctors and I try to defend them because I think the healthcare system is broken. Yes. You know, Doctors that work in hospitals are only given 20 minutes to see a patient, and you're not going to get anything done in 20 minutes. I mean, I can't. And so, and the patient won't feel seen in 20 minutes. So, you know, I think that that's the problem, not the doctors. I think it's the system that just breaks them down. And then, you know, when they don't have enough time to really deal with patients, then they just sort of decide like, okay, well, I'll just do the bare minimum, which is like, what's your symptom? Here's a prescription. Right? And so, or you're just anxious, don't worry about it. Just go home, go, go have fun, go, go to the movies, you know? So I think, so yeah, so I, I knew what it was like not to be felt and I, I never want anyone to feel that way. And if, if I was treated that way as a neurologist, right? I could, you know, I, I feel bad for these patients. How do they navigate the system?

[36:17] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

[36:17] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: So yeah, so that's, that's why I do what I do. So I start up in my book sort of telling that story. And how that led me to sort of the place where I am today, which I never thought I would be. I mean, who knew a neurologist, you know, was gonna be a connective tissue disorder specialist?

[36:34] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right. Yeah.

[36:34] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: I mean, seriously, like, so, but that's where it led me because it's such a connective tissue disorders are such risk factors for everything else that can go wrong with the body. Mm-hmm. That, you know, that, that, that's what creates, I think, complex presentations. And so they weren't getting answers from anyone else. And they just came to see me and I just decided that I would believe this and figure, see if I could help figure it out. And it turns out that a lot of them had connective tissue compromise. So I dived deep into that and then here I am, you know, 10 years later.

[37:07] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, I feel, yeah, exactly, exactly. And, and I feel so badly for physicians who, you know, have come outta training, they have a massive amount of debt and they have to take a job in a traditional model where, a lot— I have so many, you know, physician friends working in those kind of models. And like you said, 20 minutes for new patients, 10 minutes for, you know, returning patients. And it's insane. And I mean, some people, they'll see like 40 people in a day, which maybe that math doesn't quite work out, but I, but I do know definitely that there's people that see that many patients in a day.

[37:40] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Oh, absolutely.

[37:41] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, yeah, yeah. 40.

[37:43] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Can you imagine?

[37:44] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. No, I can't. I mean, I'm your caseload is like mine, where you could never see that many people with these complex conditions in a day. Never. There's no way. You can't, you can't serve them properly. So, but, but, but when you have this massive amount of debt and you have, you know, a family, a young family, or, or whatever, you often find yourself in those kinds of jobs. And it's, it's terrible because it's not satisfying, it's not good for the patient, it's not good for, you know, your self-esteem for feeding your sense of meaning, it's really problematic.

[38:17] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: I completely agree. Everything that you just said is spot on. That's exactly what happens. And it's such a shame. And it's a shame. And what's even more of a shame is that the insurance companies have made us doctors look like we're the tools.

[38:32] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

[38:32] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: You know, we're the problem, we're the bad guys. And the hospital administrators have done the same, you know? So somehow the doctors are the scapegoats for everything that's wrong with the healthcare system. Right. But we're the only ones trying to make it better for patients. So it's— the whole thing is so broken. And, you know, it's very saddening when you think about it.

[38:52] Dr. Linda Bluestein: It really is. And we're the ones adding value. The insurance company, where's their value? I mean, it's—

[38:58] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: there is no value.

[38:59] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, there isn't. And the, the hospitals have such powerful lobbies, and it's amazing. I just saw a statistic the other day, and I wish I could remember it more specifically, but it was something like The number of healthcare administrators over the past decade or something, I'll try to find the statistic and/or the article and put it in the show notes, but had gone up by, I don't know, 30-fold or 10-fold or 15-fold, some dramatic number, whereas the number of physicians had gone up, I don't know, 5% or something. It was just normal growth, whereas the number of administrators had gone up dramatically. Wow. Yeah, and obviously that money has to come from somewhere. So that's the other thing is for every dollar that's spent on healthcare, a huge amount of that is going to insurance companies and administrators and things like that, not actual care.

[39:48] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: And what people have to recognize, and I'm sure that they do, but it's important to point out that the only billable people in the healthcare system are doctors, right? So it's on our backs that we pay the administrators and that we get the insurance companies their money. And that's not fair because, you know, we're the ones that are micromanaged by the hospital administrators, by the RVUs and how many patients you're seeing and what you're ordering or not ordering, you know, that kind of stuff. And so it's just so, so upside down.

[40:21] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, yeah. And that's why so many practices, you know, I mean, there used to be lots of private practices, right? But so many of them have gotten absorbed and bought out by hospitals because the overhead became so high. I mean, that's what happened with my hospital. Husband's group, their overhead was really low when he first started it. They had, they had basically one-to-one for every doctor, there was an administrator. So like 3 doctors and 3 administrators. And by the time he left, there were like 7 doctors and like 45 administrators.

[40:50] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Oh my God.

[40:51] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, well, because, you know, right, there's the person that has to get the prior auth for the CT scan or the MRI or whatever. So you, they, you know, they had this massive amount of people and exactly what you just said, it's the doctors who are creating the billable hours. And yeah, so their overhead went from like 20% to 60% over the course of his career. So, wow, that just was not sustainable.

[41:15] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Nope, it's not. And it's also what's behind a lot of the mergers that are happening amongst the hospital systems.

[41:20] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

[41:21] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: And some of the mergers are not in the patient's best interest. I mean, my husband's group was bought by a very religious hospital organization. And so they did away with, like, gender-affirming care and, you know, transition medicine and abortion care and trans rights care, you know, whatever the hospitals were supporting, they did away with all of that. So there's a lot of pain in the community because of that particular merger. But then there's also, you know, further economic downfall on the doctors. Because now there's a lot of administrators, as with your husband's experience, there's a lot of administrators who are looking at what the doctors are billing and what they're not billing and what they're doing and not doing. And, you know, no one— I mean, the other thing that I don't understand is that doctors by definition are supposedly an intelligent lot, right? Like, we went through school, we took a million exams. I feel like it was a million. I was always taking an exam. Right, exactly. And yet we're not allowed to even like use our brains or give opinions or help to decide on structure and system. And like, we're just, I feel like we're just sort of relegated to an exam room and just told to see patients all day, every day. And I just don't understand the misuse of what are presumably not only intelligent people, but caring and compassionate people. Why else did we become doctors, you know? I mean, when I graduated college, a lot of my friends— you know, I'm from New York, so a lot of my friends went to Wall Street and made millions of dollars by the time that they were like 30. And I was in residency. You know, it's a very different life that you choose. So it's like, why did we do this if we're not going to be given the respect and the valor that we deserve, in my opinion?

[43:13] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, yeah. And I think that in terms of what's changed over time, and I wanna talk about how your practice has changed over time, but I know for sure, seeing this in my husband's practice, that when he first started his first job, well, actually this was his only job as a urologist, they valued quality and the hospitals were so happy that he was there doing surgery. And by the end, they just wanted somebody there seeing patients. They really didn't care about quality anymore. So that's also really upsetting. And I know your practice, practice has evolved a lot. So I'd love to hear about that.

[43:49] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Yeah, my practice has evolved. And some days I feel really badly about it because I recognize that my choice to not engage with those insurance criminals has, you know, consequence on, on patients who don't have disposable income. But there was no other way I could keep my practice alive. I couldn't pay my staff, I couldn't pay my utilities. And so I had to choose not to bill insurance. And, and over the years, you know, it It was, it was clear to me that I made the right decision because I will spend a lot of time with patients. And so, as you know, insurance companies don't bill you for extra time spent with patients. And so a lot of my time was just being non-reimbursed and that is not a good business model. And any business person would tell you that. And I would have business people as patients who would say like, how are you making this go? And I'm like, I'm not, I'm failing. And so I realized I had to make different business decisions. And so that was one of the decisions. So since that time though, I continue to not bill insurance, of course. And I continue to, and obviously I offer treatment options, but it's non-bill, I don't bill insurance for them. And it does create a, I mean, I feel badly about it on a lot of days, especially with patients who I know are struggling and suffering. And they will tell me that they've saved up for an appointment, which breaks my heart. But, and I know that there's gonna be further changes in the future to my practice only because I don't know how else to do it. But it's just, and again, it's because I'm made to do these kinds of decisions. I'm, you know, the healthcare system is so broken and I really wanna continue doing the work that I'm doing because I have such passion for it. And as I said, I'm finally happy again in medicine and in neurology and I don't wanna give it up. And there's only a few ways of which I don't have to give it up. And unfortunately that means, you know, you know, cash pay and concierge kinds of services. And so that's what I'm thinking through actually at right now about my next change of model.

[45:52] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. And, and, and I've basically was in the same situation when I went to open my practice. I quickly realized, you know, you do the math and you figure out, like you said, you can't pay for the Wi-Fi and a receptionist and, you know, someone to clean the exam rooms and, you know, all of those those, you know, there's a lot of expenses. And even if, even if you're, you know, not a part of a big hospital system, there's a, there's a lot of expenses. So yeah, it's really, really, really challenging.

[46:21] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: It is challenging. And people also don't realize the extraneous expenses. I mean, I just renewed my California medical license for $1,200.

[46:30] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right.

[46:31] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: I mean, and then there's all kinds of fees and malpractice insurance and, you know, commercial insurance and there's all EMRs. EMRs. Oh my gosh. EMRs. Right. Exactly. Exactly. So like, yeah. And I don't think that the public understands. I mean, how many— we're nickled and dimed as doctors. We really are.

[46:50] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

[46:50] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: You know? And so it's very hard. It's a, it's a, it's very hard profession to be in if you want to do it well for patients. So you have to make these hard decisions.

[47:01] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. And if you want to treat people that have chronic diseases, problems, because that's so different than dealing with a discrete, specific thing. Very different. Very, very different.

[47:11] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Yeah.

[47:12] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And speaking of things that are more, you know, widespread, multisystemic, the role of connective tissue in, in health, getting back to, to that, what has surprised you the most about the role of connective tissue?

[47:28] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: What has surprised me the most is that that without our connective tissue, we have no health. So what I learned that I never knew and was surprised to learn was that where our anatomy sits is genetically predetermined. And so if your connective tissue is failing to keep it where it needs to be, then nothing is going to work well. Now, we've always learned from physiology, of course, anatomy and physiology, remember those days? That a lot of our body works through cellular signals signaling. And so there's an expectation that where the signal is sent out from, that it'll be delivered at a certain place. But when that connective tissue isn't holding that organ, and therefore those cells in the place of which— and even if it's off by a millimeter, it's not where it should be. And that signal, while it gets there still because it's in their vicinity, it's not as loud and it's not as strong, and it doesn't provoke as much of post-signaling kind of transmission, right? So where the membrane of the receptor and the membrane receives it, and then there's all kinds of membrane transformations, receptor transformations of the membrane, and then it goes into the cytoplasm, and there's a cell, you know, there's different components that take place for the signaling process to get to the nuclei or to one of the extranuclear vesicles in the cell. And so all of that is somewhat suboptimal. Because the connective tissue hasn't sort of kept that organ where it needs to be. And so that was a big learning concept for me. And I don't think I explained it even all that well, but that was a big learning concept for me. And so then everything fell from there where I realized, like, this is why it's such a multi-systemic, complex phenotypic, like, presentation. And so, and that's where I began. And I started to sort of figure out, like, well, what do we need to do? And, you know, there isn't a whole lot of options for connective tissue, to be honest with you. And I always, like, the holy grail question I always say is like, how do I regenerate your connective? How do I fix your connective tissue? Because that's the problem, right? It's not, I mean, the meninges are connective tissue. The vessel, outer vessel walls are connective tissue. The fascia that holds our muscles are connective tissue. You know, the neurium that covers the nerves are connective tissue. Like, so it's the fascia that holds our organs in place in our abdomen and our pelvic cavities and our, even in our chest cavities are connective tissue. So like, how do I fix this connective tissue so that everything stays in place? To stay put. And so, and it's hard, there's no easy answer for it. And so I, you know, I have dived into a lot of regenerative medicine kind of approaches like peptides and, you know, and I've been working with a company called Hope Biosciences that works under an FDA program called Right to Try to use stem cells because we know that stem cells can regenerate connective tissue. But unfortunately FDA isn't really clear on how they feel about it. But the FDA has this program, Right to Try, of which Hope Biosciences tries to work under with these complex patients. And so I've been working with them. So I'm always trying to think of ways of just sort of regenerating connective tissue or at least healing it, right? So it's inflamed because mast cells are largely aligned within the connective tissue. And so if you have mast cell activation disorder, they are very easily triggered and degranulating and so causing all this inflammation. So at the very least, I try to manage those mast cells so that I can reduce inflammation and therefore reduce the inflammatory burden on the connective tissue. And that will allow maybe for some natural healing of it. But, you know, with the patients with EDS, I mean, there's already a, you know, an innate, probably genetic component of connective tissue disorder. So, that's hard to overcome, but you can. And then, of course, every exposure results in some immune response and some inflammatory response. I mean, we even showed that COVID degrades connective tissue. And mast cells release, you know, some proteases that target collagen. So what I'm saying is not theoretical. We know that this takes place. So if somehow we can manage this and counteract it, I think that we're giving the connective tissue at least a fighting chance.

[51:34] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And what peptides do you tend to recommend most commonly?

[51:38] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: My favorite is thymosin alpha-1. It's a great immunomodulator. My other favorite is GHK, which actually is used in burn centers because it helps to reduce scar tissue scar formation, but also helps to lay down collagen layers in a little bit more of an architecturally sound manner. So it's a little bit more structurally sound, it's got more integrity to it. And so I've put, in the years, in the past 5 years, I've put almost all of my EDS patients on GHK. It's an injectable, but with little insulin needles, so you don't really feel it. It's like the GLP-1 needles, actually. And so, yeah, and so it really does help the connective tissue.

[52:18] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Very interesting. So do you, would you prescribe both of those in the same patients? Would, would they sometimes take both or would you try one?

[52:26] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Definitely both. You can definitely do both. I mean, sometimes I, because they're out of pocket, of course, as everything is, cuz nothing is covered by insurance that actually works.

[52:33] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

[52:33] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: So, that's not true. I mean, some of the medications can work, so, and they're covered by insurance.

[52:40] Dr. Linda Bluestein: But a lot of things are not.

[52:42] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: A lot of things are not, correct. And so because of that reason, maybe sometimes I'll just say, let's start with one. And I usually start with the thymus and alpha just because I want to get some immune system control going because like I said, there's a constant immune provocation that happens. But then I'll quickly add the GHK and sometimes, you know, patients will be able to afford both at the same time. I mean, they're not super expensive though, for some, you know, it's like, like, I would say like $200 a month for each, maybe closer to $300 for one of them. But so not like crazy expensive, but obviously not affordable for everyone.

[53:16] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, definitely not. And is that something that you need to keep taking or that you could take for a little while and then stop?

[53:22] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Yeah, so I do what I refer to as receptor rest. And I think other people have sort of stolen that phrase, but because at some point I think the receptors just get saturated. And so you're just wasting your money 'cause it's got nowhere to go. But so I generally do it for 3 months on and then 1 month off and 3 months on, 1 month off. But I made that up, to be honest. I mean, not the receptor rest part. I made that frequency up. So that's where art over science comes in, right? And I do a lot of art over science, to be honest with you, in terms of like my recommendations and even the frequency of which I recommend certain things. And, you know, because there isn't a whole lot of evidence to go off of to really do evidence-based on these kinds of options for patients who have been suffering for decades. Decades in some cases. So I just always say things like, I believe this to be true because I've just been doing this for years and I've seen so many patients. And I know it's not gonna be harmful. So I still honor my oath, Hippocrates oath, right? Is that the, it's called Hippocratic? I first do no harm. And I at least think that there's the potential for a beneficial yield. And so that's when I will recommend it and then come up with like, oh, 3 months on, 3 month, 1 month off, kind of thing.

[54:38] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So yeah, no, that's super interesting. I, I personally have not tried either of those. I did try BPC-157 a number of years ago. My husband and I actually both did that. We would inject it on each other, you know, every night.

[54:51] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Oh, that's so cute.

[54:53] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Isn't that romantic? He's coming up a lot this episode. is that—

[54:58] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: it's almost Valentine's Day, so that's true, that's true.

[55:02] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Happy Valentine's Day, honey. is that, is that something that you, that you sometimes, recommend, or Yeah, I mean, I like—

[55:10] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: I mean, yeah, so thymosin alpha and GHK are my top two. I would say my third is BPC-157. So yeah, I like that one a lot.

[55:18] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. Okay. Sounds good. We had quite a few questions from, from the listeners. And for those who are listening to this episode who also submitted questions and listened to episode 90, I promise I'm going to try to get through as many of these as possible, Dr. Ruhoy, but we're going to need to wrap up soon, so we probably won't get through all of them. And I— but I will save them for our next conversation when we're going to talk about plasmalogen and, and other, and other topics that we haven't covered yet. So, so yeah, so I want to try to get through some of these though. And, so like, like one that I thought was great, and you kind of alluded to this a little bit at the beginning: is it better to lean into cognitive dysfunction or fight against it in the moment?

[56:04] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: I'm not exactly sure what means to lean? Okay, lean, fight against it. How would you fight against it? I guess is—

[56:15] Dr. Linda Bluestein: I, I think maybe they're referring to like kind of pushing through versus like what you said about going into a dark space and kind of taking a little bit of a rest.

[56:23] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: If you're— that, that's your brain telling you it needs a rest. And so, you know, the brain is the most metabolically active organ of the body, right? So remember that. And if it's not getting what it needs, it wants to shut down because it cannot it cannot generate the kind of energy that it needs to function appropriately. And it does not like that. Your brain wants, I mean, your entire body wants to be well. That's the beauty of resiliency of the human body. It really wants to be well. And so you have to listen to your body and most importantly, listen to your brain. So if you're having difficulties with cognition or with processing speed or latency of response, which is a very common thing I see on exam when patients are describing brain fog, fog, meaning I'll ask them a question and it will, you can see their wheels turning before they respond, you know? And so then it's your brain telling you that it just needs a break. And that I see with a lot of my TBI patients and post-concussion patients. And frankly, I think long COVID and ME/CFS, it's likened to a post-concussion syndrome. And I feel like that's an infectious kind of trauma to the brain, right? So it's not a physical trauma, but it's an infectious trauma. I mean, there is chemical trauma. I mean, I have a lot of patients with chemical traumas from certain medications. I mean, fluoroquinolones are a perfect example, you know, a lot of fluoroquinolone toxicities. But also there are some other classes of drugs that can create some trauma to the brain. So I, so yeah, I'm sort of rambling now, but I guess the answer to your question is listen to your brain, take a rest, don't fight through it.

[57:52] Dr. Linda Bluestein: So I will tell you, your rambling is always beneficial. Your rambling is always so educational. And fluoroquinolones, we know, are toxic to connective tissue. And I literally remember one night, this is many, many years ago, I was very, very sick and my PCP had ordered levofloxacin for me for this infection. And I literally remember in the middle of the night thinking, wait, if this can cause tendon rupture, then what's happening before the tendon rupture? Like what?

[58:22] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Exactly, exactly right.

[58:23] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, if only a small number of people are getting tendon rupture, what about the other people that are maybe getting, and this was, you know, I was at an anesthesia conference at the time. And had to be at least 15 years ago, maybe 20. But, and anyway, so that's interesting. I didn't know that about fluoroquinolones though, in the brain.

[58:40] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Yes. Yeah, absolutely. And so it's funny that, 'cause I have a similar story when during that whole time when no one was taking me seriously and people would not listen to me. And someone told me that I had, I, I asked for an MRI, but they did a CT scan of my sinuses. Mm-hmm. because I said I had headaches. And so I was, they were thinking, well, maybe it's a sinus problem, even though I've never had sinus issues in my life. Mm-hmm. Anyway, so they took a CT scan and they said, "Oh, you have inflammation of your sinuses." I looked at it, there was no inflammation, but regardless, they prescribed me moxifloxacin. And I said, "For what?" And they said, "For your sinus infection." I said, "I don't see any sinus infection and I have no sinus symptoms. What are you doing?" And they said, "Just take the moxifloxacin." And I was desperate. I mean, like these patients are, right? I was not feeling well and I was only getting worse. So I took the moxifloxacin and I was so sick, Linda. I was so sick. So every, I would take it and then within 2 hours I had a high fever. I was nauseous, I was dizzy. I had, I developed rashes that would by the next day be gone. And so I was like, you know, I thought, was it really the medication? And I would repeat it and I did it 3 days in a row and it was the exact same response. I called the nursing line. They said it can't be the moxifloxacin.

[59:47] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Ugh. You know, that just drives me crazy. I'm sure you hear this from people all the time when they're told that's not possible.

[59:54] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Yeah.

[59:55] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh. And it's like, oh. Oh my, what? Because really, you know everything that's possible.

[1:00:02] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Right. That's such a good point. And I always say to patients when they tell me about a side effect, I say things like, well, that is a little atypical for that drug, but I'm always willing to believe that anybody could react in any way to anything, right? Because we don't understand their bodies or the state of which their bodies are in, in terms of like an inflammatory state or an immune dysregulated state. I mean, we don't, we don't know. I mean, the immune system and the autonomic nervous system, it's so complex. And to act like everything is POTS, for example, I told you I'm very sacrilegious today. You know, like, it's so complex. Like, you, I don't think any one of us can pretend that we absolutely know the answer. I never think I absolutely know the answer. At least I hopefully, hopefully I don't pretend like I do. But, you You know, I, so yeah, anyway, yeah, I'm rambling again.

[1:00:54] Dr. Linda Bluestein: No, this is great. This is great. Stimulants. So that's something that of course a lot of people have tried for various different cognitive problems or ADHD, et cetera. Why do you think that oftentimes they're not helpful?

[1:01:09] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: So what's so interesting about stimulants is that there's this biology group out in Drexel University shout out to them, and I wish I remembered their names right now, but I don't— that they actually did a study in— not in humans, but on stimulants and connective tissue. And they found that it was bad for connective tissue. And they reached out to me because they didn't even know my daughter attends there. And that's what I thought. When I got the email, I was like, "Oh, they must know that my daughter's there." She's not in the biology program, but I don't— so I didn't know. It's a large school. So I didn't know how they would know, but, but they had no idea. They just— they knew that I was considered an expert in EDS, which again always sounds funny to me as a neurologist, but so they reached out and they said that they had done this study on— or they were proposing this study on, on, on rodents, I think. I have to pull out the email, but because they had done all this research that suggested that stimulant class of medications can be detrimental to connective tissue. And I was so intrigued by this. And then I thought about all my patients that are on stimulants. Yeah.

[1:02:15] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. That's fascinating.

[1:02:17] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: So I think the answer lies in there somewhere. And clearly we haven't elucidated this enough for me to answer it more definitively. But I think that stimulants have to be used in the appropriate setting. And I don't think they're always used in the appropriate setting. And I think some of the diagnoses for which they're used for, which for which they're known to be effective for, I think have other physiologic and biological basis for that diagnosis in our patient population than what is classic to respond to the stimulant class of medications. Does that make sense?

[1:02:48] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, that does make sense. And I think the other challenge is a lot of times, at least I've seen this with my patients, that, you know, they've been on something long enough and they say, oh no, no, that doesn't contribute to my tachycardia. You know, once you're on them, I think it's really hard to, to be willing to try going off. And I understand, 'cause that's scary. And deprescribing is not something that we're taught, right? We're taught how to prescribe. We're not really taught how to wean off medication. I know, it's interesting. Yeah, it's very, very interesting. I had this conversation with our colleague, Dr. Heather Tick, it was super interesting. Well, actually, she's in Washington State also.

[1:03:28] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Oh, she and I should get together.

[1:03:29] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, absolutely. And she does integrative medicine. I should, I should, well, I can introduce you offline sometime. But anyway, so I just think that it can be really, really difficult once you start something, then to, you know, try going without it because it might seem like it's helping. And some of the, like you said, if there's a detrimental effect on the connective tissue, you're probably not actually able to see that or appreciate it at the time. So that's really fascinating.

[1:03:57] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Yeah, I agree. Yeah. I think there's a lot of drugs that, you know, sometimes work and sometimes don't. And I think that to learn why they work and why they don't would help give us lots of clues into caring for these patients. And, you know, I often regularly say, you know, I don't prescribe medication that I don't understand its mechanism of action. And so this way, if a patient tells me that it was helpful, then I can, I have insight into what can be helpful or what might be the underlying pathophysiology. And then conversely, if it causes side effects, I can think about how how that might have happened and in terms of maybe things that I want to stay away from in the future with regards to other recommendations for medications. So I think it can be very helpful to understand the whys and the why-nots of every medication that we use in our patient population. But that obviously takes a lot of time and effort and documentation. And, you know, and so I think that's something that I definitely need more time to write up a lot of what I do and see and think and say.

[1:04:57] Dr. Linda Bluestein: But I, who has time? And that's another process that I feel like your average person doesn't, you know, really have a good comprehension of, and it's understandable why they wouldn't. But the amount of work that goes into publishing a paper, and that's a perfect lead into the paper that you published yesterday, which I was so excited to see about your practice and Dr. Bolognese's surgical patients and the breakdown by different condition and looking at the, I think they call it, you call it a placebo effect asset for, for in terms of how you looked at the data and what overlapping conditions were present. Were there certain things in that study that came as a particular surprise to you?

[1:05:42] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: To me, no, because, you know, I do the clinical work. I've been seeing these patients for a really long time. I think to Dr. Bolognese, because he's just been the surgeon correcting their CCI, right? So, but I was the one caring for these patients up until that surgery. So I already knew that this cohort had a lot of these diagnoses that I had made or other doctors had made, and then they just came to me for further care. But so I wasn't surprised by the findings. And I also follow these patients postoperatively, so I knew how well they were doing. And so for the most part, and yeah, so, and that's why we just decided that we had to write this paper. And so we designed the survey and we sent it out and we got a lot of information and, you know, we were all very pleasantly surprised by the ultimate analysis. And so, yeah, it's been well received actually.

[1:06:34] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, really, really, really fantastic paper. And one thing that really stood out to me was when you talked about the affected and unaffected group. And I thought that was a great way to put it because, well, I guess the affected group has a known diagnosis of a connective tissue disorder, right? And the unaffected group does not have a known diagnosis, they— we know they still may have a connective tissue disorder, but the unaffected group, the technically, you know, listed as unaffected group, had a higher rate of having Chiari 1 malformation and also had higher rates of MALS, or median arcuate ligament syndrome. That was really fascinating to me.

[1:07:09] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Well, when you think about the role of the connective tissue, again, I mean, it's— it does make sense, right? So the key— I mean, in fact, Millerat many years ago found that, those with, hypermobility actually were at greater risk of Chiari malformation. So that had been shown previously. But I agree with the— in terms of the compression syndrome, like MALS, you know, it's a connective tissue disorder. It's a ligament, right? So it made sense, of course. And it just sort of drives home the importance of evaluating for all of these diagnoses for these patients because, you know, technically and theoretically, you should need them all corrected. For the patient to really have a chance at full recovery. So that's what we do. And we look at every single one of these diagnoses for patients and try to make sure that we've at least identified it, addressed it, managed it, did what we need to do for it. And patients do do well when we make sure that we've comprehensively covered all of it.

[1:08:08] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, that's real— that's really important because we know that so many people are experiencing so many different things. And, and that's why when they go to a doctor who only has 5 minutes, it does sound like they're, you know, making some of this up, because we're, we're not taught in medical school that you can have that many things wrong with you simultaneously.

[1:08:25] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: That's right, that's right, right. It's, it's so true. It's like you have to have one thing. What's, what's your chief concern, your chief complaint?

[1:08:34] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right. Yeah, yeah. Okay, well, this has been such a fantastic conversation, and we end every episode with a hypermobility hack. you've You've given us already, of course, so many great hacks from the peptides to, you know, different medications that you prescribe and things like that, and different therapies with the IVIG and plasmapheresis and things like that. But do you have any additional hypermobility hack that you can share with the listeners?

[1:09:04] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Additional? Well, that's hard because I did give a lot of my usual stuff, but I think I think that, honestly, I always tell patients that a really good physical therapist that understands a hypermobile body is like worth their weight in gold, in my opinion. Because, you know, all the fancy surgeries and the medications that we can prescribe, and even all of the peptides that I do and plasmapheresis and immunotherapies, you need a good physical therapist. You know, nothing is going to correct the underlying hypermobility permanently. We can reduce the burden, we can improve the integrity, but a good physical therapist who understands the hypermobile body really is cornerstone of therapy forevermore, frankly, right? So well into, you know, later in life to keep the joints flexible, to keep them moving, to keep things aligned and symmetric as best as they can, though none of us are symmetric, but as best as you can to sort of keep it symmetric and just to really be your friend throughout this journey in life as a hypermobile body.

[1:10:07] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And I'm glad you mentioned flexible too, because I feel like so many people, stop stretching completely. And of course, you wanna do it the right way, but that's what, that's what I did. And now I have parts of my body that are so incredibly inflexible, and that's not good either. I mean, we wanna be doing it in a very thoughtful and careful way, and like nerve flossing and things like that. That could be really—

[1:10:29] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: You were a dancer.

[1:10:31] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh my gosh, I was so flexible. I mean, we would do this thing called heel in the hand. And so you'd wrap your arm all the way around your foot, and you'd put your leg like this, this, and, you know, and just, no problem, you know, and obviously doing the splits every which way and stuff like that. But, but now I'm so not flexible, and because I was having so many problems when I had my Tarlov cyst, and before I had my Tarlov cyst surgery, and I had so much pain in my hamstrings, and I was basically told, you know, don't stretch, and my— and I kept, because it hurt, in my brain I'm thinking, this is, you know, danger, danger, right? I'm getting that message to my brain. So I didn't stretch my hamstrings for so long that now it's, yeah, that part of my body, my posterior chain anyways, is very stiff, which is not good. Yeah.

[1:11:18] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: No, it's not good. But you should work on that with a good physical therapist.

[1:11:22] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, I do have one that I see regularly. In fact, she was on the show recently. But yeah, I'm continuing to work on it and I probably should investigate maybe adding some other thing. I do red light therapy also.

[1:11:35] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: I love red light therapy. So the COX enzyme, of the electron transport chain is a photoreceptor. So it's very responsive to things like red light therapy, and it helps the mitochondrial function.

[1:11:45] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wonderful. Do you have a favorite red light device?

[1:11:48] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: I do, but it's like $150,000. Oh, I don't own it. Don't get me wrong, I don't have that kind of money. But it really is like when you look at the parameters and sort of how it works and the technology itself, it's really amazing. I'll send you the link. You can buy it.

[1:12:05] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

[1:12:05] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: And then I'll come to you and use it.

[1:12:07] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, yeah, yeah. No problem. I just got a spare $150K in my, in my back pocket. and, and there are places where you can go.

[1:12:15] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Yeah.

[1:12:15] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And there's also things that you can purchase. So are you aware of what the difference— of course it probably depends on the place and the thing that you buy, but yeah, you know, since you mentioned this one that's like, you know, obviously out of most everyone's budget.

[1:12:28] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: I, yeah, I mean, I don't, I don't support any, I mean, I don't want to name brands because I don't support brands and, right, you know, so, but I do think that there are low quality ones and high quality ones, right? and so I often wonder like if it's even worth a few hundred dollars for a low quality one that a lot of my patients are buying off the internet. And, you know, but I, yeah, so, but I, I know that red light therapy as a, as a treatment plan, as a modality, can be very effective. Perspective.

[1:12:57] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay, wonderful, wonderful. before we go, first of all, I want to thank you so much for joining me again. So this is actually technically the third time that I've interviewed you, which is so— such a treat. I'm so fortunate to have been able to talk to you. Yeah, I always love talking to you, and I will make sure to link all of those other episodes in the show notes so people can listen to those as well. And, I also want to know what projects you're up to, if you're doing, if you have any new research projects or anything like that.

[1:13:28] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Yes. So I'm a couple of projects. I mean, I'm doing a muscle biopsy study for electron transport chain abnormalities in ME/CFS and long COVID patients. And so that's sort of exciting for me. I think I had mentioned that maybe in a previous episode, but, but so that's one of the projects that I have going on, but I'm also working on like a masterclass kind of thing, like an educational, Oh yeah. A couple of people had approached me to do this, and so I'm excited to do that, to do a masterclass on basically neuro EDS kind of thing. And then I'm also writing a paper on neuro EDS, so it sort of goes hand in hand. And I think that's it, actually. Otherwise, I'm working.

[1:14:14] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, yeah. No, you're very busy. You're very, very busy. And for the course, who is the intended audience? For that?

[1:14:21] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: patients.

[1:14:22] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

[1:14:23] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Okay. Yeah. I mean, obviously I would love doctors too. I mean, so David and I, Dr. Kaufman and I have a podcast. I think everyone, it's called Unraveled: Understanding Complex Illness. We recently went to YouTube, we were on Patreon. And so our goal of course was to educate and we had hoped to get a lot more physicians, as subscribers when we were on Patreon. We do have a few, but not as many as we had hoped. We have a lot of patients and who are supporters of which we love and are grateful for. But our goal is to actually help patients by educating doctors, right, so that patients are better understood. And so we moved to YouTube in hopes that we could improve the number of physicians that are subscribi— are subscribing, I guess it's called on YouTube, subscribing, not prescribing. so we just moved there, and so it's fairly new, and we actually do have quite a few more subscribers than we did on Patreon. So hopefully we're keeping our fingers crossed, and I think that we're going to be on your podcast together sometime in the future.

[1:15:21] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, yes, yes. Wonderful. That's, that's so great. And actually, this— we did a pretty big survey recently and found that 20% of the listeners of this podcast, at least in this survey, are healthcare professionals.

[1:15:36] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Oh wow, you have— that's a great number you have.

[1:15:39] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, yeah, it's really great.

[1:15:40] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Good for you.

[1:15:41] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, it's really great. So while I, I agree, I love educating patients, and that's so, so important, we know that if you can educate a physician and raise their awareness about these and they can provide better quality of care. And there are, of course, some really great programs out there, like the EDS ECHO program, but most physicians are so busy, they're not gonna take the time to, you know, take that much time out of their schedule to learn about something that, in their mind, at least when they start it, doesn't affect that many people, that many of their patients, yeah, yeah.

[1:16:12] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Right, and I think it's like that old saying, you know, if you give a man a fish, he eats for a day, if you teach him to fish, he eats for a lifetime. And so it's similar in that we wanna help patients by educating doctors so that when patients go see that one doctor, that doctor has a better understanding of what might be going on and where he or she can start, right? So that's, that's our goal.

[1:16:33] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Yeah. And hopefully they won't be gaslighting people anymore.

[1:16:37] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Right.

[1:16:37] Dr. Linda Bluestein: And be, be much more empathetic and, and everything. Even if, if they're within the insurance system and they can't take a lot of time, maybe they can have them come back for another visit and, and things like that.

[1:16:47] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Exactly. Exactly.

[1:16:48] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

[1:16:33] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Yeah. Yeah.

[1:16:49] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right. Where can we find you online?

[1:16:56] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: I have a very mediocre social media presence. So my, my new practice is called Anthurium.org. So it's a plant, it's a perennial plant that has a heart-shaped flower. So it's a very pretty plant that always sort of resonated with me. So it's called Anthurium, A-N-T-H-U-R-I-U-M.org. Okay, so they can see my practice there. And then I have— I'm on Blue Sky, and I don't remember the name of my, my handle. It's a weird, like, long social Blue Sky, but it's Ruth Hoy.

[1:17:27] Dr. Linda Bluestein: What's Blue Sky?

[1:17:28] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: I'm not following that.

[1:17:29] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, it's the new—

[1:17:29] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: so when people left Twitter, they went to Blue Sky. Somebody told me to join Blue Sky, so I did.

[1:17:36] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Gotcha.

[1:17:37] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Okay. And I'm also still on Twitter. It's @RuhoyMD. And then I'm on Instagram, you know, so, which I actually sort of like, but so Instagram is Eileen Ruhoy, MD, PhD. And then I'm— I have a TikTok account. I know it's almost embarrassing, like I'm 100 years old, what am I doing? But, it's fun. I actually enjoy it. And I enjoy— and sometimes, you know, people will ask me questions and I love to— I love to educate. Like, I really— it's a passion of mine. I just really love educating. Anyway, so I have a TikTok account, Eileen Ruhoy, MD, PhD. So that's where you can find me. So come follow me everywhere because otherwise I'm really considering leaving these accounts. To be honest with you, if it wasn't for the book coming out, and my publisher really wants me to use those accounts because I do have followers, so I probably would consider— because my public persona, I'm always uncomfortable with. I always feel like, "Oh, that's so cringe." Yeah.

[1:18:37] Dr. Linda Bluestein: It's hard. It's hard 'cause we're not, I mean, you know, we both went to medical school and through residency and everything 'cause we wanted to take care of patients, not to be, you know, TikTok famous or anything like that.

[1:18:48] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Exactly, no, that's exactly right. So it's funny 'cause I will post a video and then I won't look at it for like weeks because I won't wanna know what people are saying or how many likes it got. Like, I'm very weird about social media. So go follow me so that I think that it's worth it.

[1:19:03] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, yeah, absolutely. We will make sure to link all of that in the show notes so people can find your website. Your website and your YouTube channel and all of those other wonderful places, because you're right, it's a lot of work. And it's wonderful to hear nice things from people, 'cause that's the other thing is, you know, we're human too, right? And so I don't know if this ever happens to you, but sometimes I'll get like 20 wonderful nice things and then one thing that's not as nice, and I find myself hyper-focusing on that one. And it's bad because there were all these other wonderful people that said such nice things and appreciate, you know, work that we do that does not, you know, bring in money and/or cost money for us to do. It's, you know, like this podcast is free to the listener, but, you know, is a labor of love for sure. So.

[1:19:53] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: Yeah, no, that absolutely happens to me, which is why I don't look at my post for weeks at a time because I don't wanna see someone who might have not loved my video or my post, you know, because then I am very sensitive in that regard.

[1:20:06] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Oh, I'm glad it's not just me. Oh my goodness. Well, I just love chatting with you. This is so, so great. I think I'm gonna have to schedule more podcast interviews with you just so we can, just so we can hang out. And of course everyone's gonna love hearing anything that you have to, to talk about. So, oh, I don't know about that. Thank you so much. I know that you are crazy busy. You've got a lot of things going on and, we'll definitely have to have you back. Yeah. When the book is out so we can talk about the book more specifically.

[1:20:33] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: I would love that. I would love that. I would love that. Yeah, for sure. Yeah, so that people can read it first and then sort of know what it's about and I could talk more specifically about it.

[1:20:42] Dr. Linda Bluestein: But yeah, and we can, and we'll plan that episode to answer more listener questions because I do feel badly that we ran out of time to address too many of the listener questions that came in last time. But I also wanna be respectful of your time.

[1:20:58] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: I appreciate that. I do have a transcranial Doppler to do right now for my patients.

[1:21:01] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, I really need to let you go then. Yeah, yeah.

[1:21:04] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: so yeah, but I, I love answering listeners' questions. And in fact, David knows that I get very upset during our live sessions when we can't cover all the questions that come in.

[1:21:13] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Sure.

[1:21:13] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: So I really do want your listeners to know that the next time you'll have me on, if you'll have me, of course I will answer all the questions.

[1:21:20] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. So we'll make that episode really just a, a Q&A, you know, AMA kind of a thing. So, so, well, thank you again so very much. It was so great to chat with you. And I really appreciate you taking taking the time.

[1:21:32] Dr. Eileen Ruhoy: No, of course. Thanks for inviting me, and it was great talking to you.

[1:21:38] Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, that was so much fun talking with my very dear friend and colleague, Dr. Eileen Ruhoy, and I hope you enjoyed that as much as I did. Thank you so much for listening to this week's episode of the Bendy Bodies with Hypermobility MD podcast. You can really help us spread the word about joint hypermobility and related conditions by leaving a review and sharing the podcast. This really helps support the show. If you'd like to meet with me one-on-one, you can check out the available options on the services page of my website at hypermobilitymd.com. You can find me, Dr. Linda Bluestein, on Instagram, Facebook, TikTok, Twitter, and LinkedIn at Hypermobility MD. You can find Human Content, my producing team, at Human Content Pods on TikTok and Instagram. You can find full video episodes up every week on YouTube at Bendy Bodies Podcast. To learn about the Bendy Bodies Program disclaimer and ethics policy, submission verification and licensing terms, and HIPAA release terms, or to reach out with any questions, please visit bendybodiespodcast.com. Bendy Bodies Podcast is a human content production. Thank you for being a part of our community, and we'll catch you next time on the Bendy Bodies Podcast.
