---
num: 157
title: "Could Your Gut Pain Be EDS-Related? with Dr. Pradeep Chopra (Ep 157)"
date: "2025-08-07"
duration: "1h 26m"
description: "In this episode of the Bendy Bodies Podcast, Dr. Linda Bluestein sits down once again with fellow pain specialist Dr. Pradeep Chopra to take listeners on a guided “walk” through the GI tract. From teeth to the stomach and beyond, they uncover how connective tissue disorders like EDS (Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes) and HSD (Hypermobility Spectrum Disorders) along with POTS (Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome) and MCAS (Mast cell activation syndrome), can trigger unexpected abdominal pain and digestive challenges. Along the way, they explore overlooked diagnoses like Eagle Syndrome, SIBO (Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth), and MALS (Median Arcuate Ligament Syndrome), while also revealing hacks and strategies that empower patients to better understand and manage their symptoms. This is part one of a two-part deep dive into GI issues you won’t want to miss."
tags:
  - "EDS"
  - "POTS"
  - "MCAS"
  - "Diagnosis"
  - "Treatment"
  - "Neurology"
  - "Genetics"
  - "Hypermobility"
audioUrl: "https://p.podderapp.com/9752035609/traffic.megaphone.fm/TCAHH1215988005.mp3?updated=1753992244"
videoUrl: "https://youtu.be/Yp-WADIS6GY"
snippets: []
guests:
  - "Dr. Pradeep Chopra"
guestImages: []
---
Dr. Linda Bluestein: Welcome back, every bendy body, to the Bendy Bodies Podcast with your host and founder, Dr. Linda Bluestein, the Hypermobility MD. Today we are going to be talking about abdominal pain and gastrointestinal problems with EDS, HSD, POTS, and MCAS. I am so fortunate to have Dr. Pradeep Chopra with me back again on Bendy Bodies. Dr. Chopra is world-renowned for his incredible work in EDS and HSD, POTS, mast cell activation disorders, CRPS, and central sensitization disorders. Dr. Chopra is a Harvard-trained, board-certified pain medicine specialist with over 25 years of experience. We will link all of Dr. Chopra's prior Bendy Bodies podcast episodes in the show notes for easy access. I am so excited to have this conversation because I know that you very well may be suffering from abdominal pain and other GI symptoms. So I hope this is gonna be super helpful for you. As always, this information is for educational purposes only and is not a substitute for personalized medical advice. Stick around until the very end so you don't miss any of our special hypermobility hacks. Let's get started. All right, well, I am so excited to be back with Dr. Chopra, and today we're going to be talking about abdominal pain and other problems in the GI tract. And it's so great to see you again.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: It's wonderful to be back again. It's a real pleasure. And, you know, I think Bendy Bodies is doing an amazing job because I get lots of patients that come in and say, like, I'll give them a diagnosis and I think I'm like this hotshot giving them a diagnosis. And they're like, oh yeah, we heard it on Bendy Bodies. I'm like, got it.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, good. I'm glad that we are reaching more and more people because, you know, as you know, there's gonna be a lot of things that we're gonna talk about today that we've talked about on previous episodes. This kind of education doesn't have to happen one-on-one in a doctor's office. And a lot of these things, people don't have great resources, so they'll hear things that we talk about and it will lead them to get more diagnostics or, you know, start to track things down themselves and play detective, which is unfortunately really important in this day and age.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: You know, I think one of the best things about going on a public forum and talking about diseases and sharing ideas is that it's empowering the patients to better understand what's going on with them. And I hate to say this, but it also helps them from being gaslit. But more importantly, they get to understand, okay, you know, I have this condition. It's weird, sounds strange to me. My doctors think I'm crazy, but you know what? I heard these two people on Bendy Bodies talk about that exact same thing and they had an explanation. And that's what I like about it. And it's, this information is available to them free of cost. And it's not like, I know you've spent millions of hours studying this. It doesn't mean you just woke up one day and you knew everything about EDS. I personally know how much work you've put in. I know that. And, you know, I have spent weekends and weekends and weekends and days and nights reading, studying, understanding, researching, literally inventing treatments for conditions associated with EDS. And it's such a pleasure to share it with them. And, you know, that might be our legacy.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: You know, it'll be on my tombstone. Thank you for being on Bendy Bodies or something like that.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I thought you were gonna say that like some of the treatments that you invented were gonna be on your tombstones. Okay, well, you're gonna have to have a big tombstone, but if Bendy Bodies makes it onto your tombstone, that would be pretty cool too.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Oh yeah, no, if I have to put everything that I invented or discovered or researched it's gonna be a massive tomb. I mean, it has to be something like the Great Wall of China or something. Right, right. We'll just put a little QR code on the gravestone. There you go.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, yeah. You might have just invented something else that could be very valuable for a lot of people who wanna share their life's work after they're gone. So, and definitely that's something that I've thought about too, you know, we help people when we see them one-on-one, of course, but we need to reach more people than that. And so I think about that all the time. You know, what do I want my legacy to look like?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So if you left a good footprint on this planet, everybody left a footprint that would be useful and will follow their legacy. That's really going to change the world. Yeah. It's not about having a big mansion or a building or something like that named after you, you know, or a hospital wing named after you, but it's more of, yes, I help this mom understand what's going on with their kids and those kids can then have a full life and then they will pass it on to their kids and change families and generations.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So, I know that this started as you and I were talking on the phone the other day about this AGA clinical practice update on GI manifestations in POTS, hypermobile EDS, et cetera, that was published fairly recently in May of 2025 by Dr. Aziz and colleagues. And there were some really great things that they did in that paper, but I know there were some other things that we were going to mention as additional factors to consider. Do we want to start out by talking about some of the things that we thought were valuable from this paper? Or I know we have quite an extensive list of things that we want to add and get into that because we want to, as you proposed, which I think was a great idea, we're going to start with the teeth. We're not going to start with the esophagus or the mouth. We're actually going to start with the teeth and work our way down. So do we want to talk about the paper a little bit first, or do we want to just dig right into this whole journey that we're going to take through the GI tract?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: I mean, the good thing is that a paper was published recognizing the connection between GI tract and EDS. That's the good thing. Uh, the not so good thing was that, you know, they came up with these—

Dr. Linda Bluestein: It's—

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: I'm looking at it right now— it says, uh, clinical practice update. And, uh, so they've given a list of them, 16 updates, uh, but most of them just center around POTS and mast cell activation syndrome, which was, you know, yeah, they talked extensively about MCAS and they talked extensively about POTS. Uh, but I think there was a lot that they missed.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And we could have added that. I don't know the reason for not adding that. Um, there may be a reason, uh, because the gastroenterology, they don't consider, I don't know. To me, GI means stomach, abdomen, anything in that abdomen is GI for me.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: I mean, I can't say the liver is not—the liver is also a part of the GI and the spleen is also, and all of those things. And so what we are gonna do today is we're going to leave the guidelines alone. We're gonna talk about our research. We can supplement the guidelines because they talked a lot about POTS and MCAS, which we've done on previous podcasts and we've talked extensively about it. But we'll talk specifically about GI abdominal issues in EDS. How's that?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Yeah. Anything affecting the gastrointestinal tract or like you said, the abdominal cavity, I think would be very helpful for a lot of people. So yeah, let's start with the teeth. So there are issues with the teeth that can affect how you feel in your belly, right? So starting with that is probably a good place to start.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Well, so I have these weird ideas, okay? You know, I think in one of my previous podcasts I said that all my brainstorming happens when I brush my teeth.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes, you have said that before.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: See how my teeth are clean?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: They look great. Yeah.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: That's why all my ideas come when I brush my teeth for some reason.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So do you brush them for a really long time then?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Um, I wind up, and then when I get really excited, I have my phone next to me, and if I get really excited about something, I start, you know, I've got toothpaste in my mouth. And I put my brush on the side and I start typing in my phone just because, you know, your brain cells only work for so long. Like after 2 minutes, you're like, what was that thing I was going to write or discuss? So I quickly type it into my phone before I forget. And so, yes, a lot of my ideas came here. And one of the ideas was that you and I are going to take a stroll. We're going to take a little walk down the gastrointestinal tunnel. Let's call it a tunnel. Okay.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And we'll start with the teeth. Although teeth technically don't belong to the gastroenterologist, they belong to the dentist. But it's—nothing will happen if you don't have teeth.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Teeth are very important. Right. So teeth and gums are a big issue in EDS, hypermobile EDS. Um, teeth is connective tissue. The enamel on the teeth is connective tissue. And some people have what is called soft teeth.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And, you know, they brush with hard bristles on our toothbrush and the toothpaste that we use, like the Colgate ones and all those. Those are all abrasive. Did you know that you can clean your headlamp on your car with toothpaste? Or you can clean silver, old silver with toothpaste.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: That's a little worrisome. Yeah, that's a hack.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: That's a hack. Yeah. That's a hack. Okay. So anyway, I digress. So the enamel on the teeth is soft. And so, you know, you brush your teeth with this hard toothbrush and you have this abrasive sandy toothpaste and you scrape off some of the enamel and then you worry that, oh, I'm getting a cavity and then you brush harder and harder and then finally you have a big hole in there and then some germ decides to live in there. And that's one problem. The second problem is that, did you know that people in EDS have dancing teeth.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Dancing teeth.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: They move around, they shift around.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I've heard that.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: You know that?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, my oral-facial pain doctor is working on a study about how teeth in EDS often do move faster with orthodontia, but then often will regress afterwards. Of course, that can happen to a lot of people, but, uh, but I have never heard them referred to as dancing teeth, and I will—yeah, that's your term.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: That's fine. Okay.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And, and I wanna make sure for people who just heard this about the toothpaste, I know that you have an alternative that you like for brushing teeth. So if you could let us know what that is too.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Right. So my recommendation on that is there's a dental gel called LIV Fresh. L-I-V Fresh. It's a little expensive unfortunately, but it's not abrasive.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So it's what we call a chelating agent, which means it kind of wipes stuff off the teeth without scraping off anything. And, you know, you just wet the toothbrush and you put a little blob of this LIV Fresh and just sort of go gently, sort of applying and gently brushing it off. And it works really well. Actually, it works well on the gums also.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I really like the Waterpik for that. And especially, you know, now they make the battery-powered ones. I used to make a huge mess in the bathroom. But if you get the battery-powered one, you can do it in the shower. So you don't make as much of a mess.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Those PowerJets, right?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Mm-hmm. Those are amazing. And they'll clean out anything. So, yeah, I like those. So we just walk through all the 32 teeth, I guess?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: We're going to walk through each one individually?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: No, no, no. We're not going through each one.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: But taking care of your teeth is important because, yeah, very, um, any infection in the teeth is going to be carried into your GI tract and then into your blood, and then of course, uh, everywhere.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So having healthy teeth and gums is extremely important and also contributes to inflammation, right?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely does. If you have inflamed gums, that inflammation is going to spread. And so any, I mean, if you have an infection in the gums, it's going to cause inflammation everywhere. And this is extremely important. I hope my dentist is listening. He'd be so proud.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: You can always send this to him.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: He and I have had arguments about LIV Fresh. He's dismissed me many times. And I've proven him wrong because after I started using LIV Fresh, he hasn't been able to find any cavities.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh. Oh, he's upset because you're putting him out of work. That's why.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yep. Yep. So the next thing I want to talk about was the jaw.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Hmm. Well, what about the jaw?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Okay. The jaw. So on the jaw, we have two things to talk about. One is TMJ dysfunction and the other one is what's called Eagle syndrome. And, you know, TMJ is temporomandibular joint and it's a kind of a very, it's not a well-made joint because I know, I'm sorry, I hope I don't get hit by lightning, but it's not a well-made joint. It's not just the EDSers, also in the non-EDS people, it does dislocate or sub-lock. It does. And I think God wanted us not to open our mouths too big and we didn't listen to him. And so, when you don't listen to that, your mandible dislocates.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And I have a hack for my oral-facial pain doctor. When you yawn, tuck your chin down to your chest, cuz then you can't open your mouth as wide.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah, you're right. Yeah.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So she, because she gets a lot of patients that have open locking, so she recommends doing that. So because yeah, the jaw problems can contribute to chewing problems, which can, you know, obviously cause problems with digesting your food, et cetera. So, but I did, sorry, I interrupted you. Keep going.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: No, that's a great hack. I love it. Oh, we are allowed to interrupt when it's hack time.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Because then you'll forget the hack.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Exactly.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So on the TMJ, we talked about—so this muscle is called the masseter muscle, and it's a really powerful muscle. And this muscle is called the temporalis muscle. And these are our chewing, grinding muscles. And what happens is that a lot of us subconsciously at night will grind or clench. And it also, there's a phenomenon where when you're lifting something heavy or when you're hurting, you tend to clench your teeth. It gives you that little extra boost and energy. And so we tend to clench our teeth. You know, when you're lifting something heavy, you pick up your whatever. And so we do clench and grind our teeth a lot. And what happens is these muscles get tired and then during the day you're talking, you're eating, and then they never get rest. And they finally start to get inflamed and then they have muscle spasms and muscle knots in them. It's really hard to treat TMJ from grinding because it's a change of habit. And changing a habit is very difficult. You know how long it takes to change a habit?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, you, we hear like 2 weeks, but 4 months. Oh wow. Okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: 4 months.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Not 2 weeks.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: No, 4 months. Okay.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wow. That is a long time.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So what I tell patients is to start subconsciously during the day and at night, especially before bedtime, start thinking about not clenching, not grinding, like kind of obsessing about not clenching and grinding. And what happens is the brain subconsciously registers that and then they don't clench and grind. You know, I don't know if you ever had this because it happens with me a lot. I'll set, if I have to take a flight at 4 o'clock in the morning and I set my alarm for 3 o'clock, I will wake up 10 minutes to 3 and turn off the alarm before it even gets a chance to wake me up. And that's because all day you'd be thinking like, okay, I got to get up at 3. I got to get up at 3 and I got to go to the airport. And so subconsciously, the brain sets its own alarm. It doesn't trust you to set an alarm. And so you set your own alarm and it happens. And this is what in TMJ is, if you start obsessing about not clenching and grinding, it helps a lot.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I have two hacks from my doctor, Dr. Julie Robinson-Smith, who is my oral-facial pain doctor. So her two hacks, because I clench a lot and the teeth I know are not only supposed to touch like very rarely, they're not supposed to be touching. Like that's a huge problem right there. And she told me to set a timer on my phone to go off every 15 minutes. And every time that the timer went off to pay attention if my teeth were touching or not. Now my, I don't know if it's my EDS or what, but my proprioception is so bad that I have a hard time even telling if my teeth are touching or not. But this is what she wanted me to do. And it's gotten a lot better since then. But anyway, so every 15 minutes you set this timer and when it goes off, you write down if your teeth were touching or not. And then you start tracking and making sure that as you're paying attention, you're doing it less and less and less. And then she gave me like frequencies that if it's happening this amount, then you can decrease the frequency. And if it's still happening a lot, then you keep checking every 15 minutes. This is of course while you're awake. You don't wake yourself up to see if you're clenching. But that was one hack. And the other hack is SSRIs contribute to clenching, right? So—

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Really? Mm-hmm. Oh, I had no idea.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yep. Yep.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So either you clench or you get depressed.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right. Right. So just—

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Choose one.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Just food for thought and pun intended.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Okay. I didn't realize that. Oh. So if you find yourself, so even during the day, just remember not to clench. And there are a couple of things I can do. There's a rule called lips together, teeth apart. Lips together, teeth apart. And the other one is, which I do is I stick my tongue between my teeth. So if I find myself clenching, I stick my tongue between my teeth and I kind of breaks that cycle. Now the expensive way or the fancy way of treating TMJ is that they use something called an oral appliance. So these are highly specialized orthodontists who design oral appliances. And so you're actually clenching on air when you're biting down. So they have a day-use one and then they have a nighttime-use one. And there are very few, but there are some really good ones out there. Uh, the common thing that the people do is they give you this mouth guard, which I think doesn't make much sense because then now you're biting down on plastic. So it does protect your teeth, but you're still clenching. It doesn't solve the problem.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: You're still putting the forces to the jaw. Yeah.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah. But I have a little hack for that.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So it's, you know, it's hard for people to do all these things. And remembering this, you know, keeping up not to grind, not to do all those things. So what I'll do is I'll shoot some Botox into the masseter and the temporalis muscle. And what that does is they still clench, but now they're not clenching as hard. And it doesn't affect their eating or chewing, but when they clench, it's not that hard clench and it does work. It does work because I get it and I know it works. Oh yeah. So I had these headaches. I had these headaches and they would go away, wouldn't go away. And nothing was working until I realized I was sitting like this and I felt it and I could feel these muscle knots in my masseter muscles. And I realized that. So I had someone shoot Botox into these muscles. So that's for TMJ. But very often we get patients that come into our offices. You have seen them, I've seen them. Oh, you know, I've got horrible TMJ. I've got horrible TMJ. And you tell them, show me where your pain is. And they'll point to somewhere down here. Not precisely here, but here. And they'd been told by a lot of doctors, oh, it's TMJ, but it's actually something called Eagle syndrome. Now, this has nothing to do with the bird eagle. This was actually Dr. Eagle who discovered this. So let me explain the symptoms of Eagle syndrome.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And can you—you're pointing, and for people who are listening, can you make sure to describe where you're pointing?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So I'm pointing to under my jaw, my handsome chiseled jaw, pointing under that.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: You're pointing lower than—

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: lower than—

Dr. Linda Bluestein: yeah. Lower than the angle of the jaw, right? Not the neck, but like coming down underneath on the neck. Okay. Yeah. I'm sorry. Keep going.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: But basically it's the jaw area.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Uh-huh. Right.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So when you think of TMJ and if you think of extremely painful TMJ, then always think of, well, is this, could this be Eagle syndrome? So the symptoms of Eagle syndrome are difficulty swallowing. They feel like there's something stuck in their throat. And then they have shooting pains from their throat to their ear. And this is not so common, that's pain at the base of the tongue. I don't see that as often. But if you have them turn their head to one side and you tell them to swallow, it's hard for them to do it. It hurts. And then they have ringing in or buzzing in their ears. It is associated with headaches. It's a very big reason for headaches. And the way I examine them is I press, so I'm pressing under my jaw, my mandible. I'm pressing under there. There is a piece of bone called the styloid process. And I'm pressing on the styloid process and they go, ouch, with that. And then I do one more step is I put my finger into their mouth and I go along the mandible, just the side of the mouth. And I sneak in behind the jaw.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And I hit the styloid process and it's really painful. It's very painful.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And I have a question about that too. Are you finding that more unilaterally, or, you know, so one side, or bilateral in your patients?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: It's mostly bilateral, but one side is always worse than the other. And, you know, the anatomy is a little hard to explain, but basically there's a piece, there's a small bone at the back of the mandible, and that kind of grows down and it becomes longer and it presses on a nerve which goes to the throat and the tongue. It's called the glossopharyngeal nerve.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And we can add an image on the, on the video for that so people can see it on YouTube.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah, absolutely. Uh, and then it can also, if you turn your head, it can press on the vein, uh, it's called the internal jugular vein.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And even in some severe cases, it can press on the internal carotid artery.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Now that is extremely important because one of the reasons people have headaches in EDS is raised intracranial pressure.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Pressure inside the head goes up. And the reason it goes up, there are many reasons, but this reason over here is related to Eagle syndrome, is that the amount of blood going into the head has to be the same amount that comes out. Now, so the internal carotid artery takes the blood into the brain and the internal jugular vein drains that blood out. And so when they turn their head, the styloid process, that little bone growing down, it actually pinches the internal jugular vein. So now you have blood going into your head, but not the same amount coming out. And so they have this intense intracranial pressure headache. So that's Eagle syndrome.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. Well, before we leave Eagle syndrome, in terms of treatment for Eagle syndrome, there is surgery, of course. Are you using glossopharyngeal nerve blocks to work that up, or are you relying more on imaging, or can you elaborate a little bit on that?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Both. We, so surgeons want to look at, they want to look at CT, they want to look at the CT angiogram. And it's a thin slice. Um, they wanna see a thin slice CT. Mm-hmm. And they'll also do a glossopharyngeal nerve block.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And if the patient gets relief and the angiogram is positive, then the surgeon goes in there and, uh, shortens the styloid process.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm. Okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: It does work. It really is a— the results are, uh, amazing actually. So we're moving away from Eagle syndrome. So before we do that, I just want to reiterate to everyone is that if it's a really severe pain in the jaw area, think of Eagle syndrome. It could be TMJ, but TMJ does hurt, but it's more of a headache and it's a low annoying headache. But Eagle syndrome is a sharp, very sharp pain, and it hurts to swallow. So we are still hanging out in the mouth, right? We're going on a walk and we walk down and now we're entering into the esophagus. Yep. Uh, one little trick that I do if patients with MCAS come in and I want to see if their GI tract is affected by MCAS is I look at the throat. Hmm. And Dr. Bluestein, I have to tell you, almost 100% of patients have inflammation of the throat. Hmm. Wow. I get surprised if it's not inflamed.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And are you saying almost 100% of your MCAS patients or almost 100% of your EDS patients? Which, which population specifically? Because I, obviously there's a tremendous amount of overlap. But I would imagine some have one diagnosis, some have all three, you know, POTS, EDS, and MCAS. Um, so is it, does it seem to be more associated with the MCAS or is that unclear?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: MCAS.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: It's these MCAS patients, uh, that have inflammation. So that kind of gives me a little idea that they have it because they have inflammation of the throat, which is the beginning of the GI tract. So it gives me an idea that they could be. And then as I go down further, I look for other signs, but that's one thing. And then if you ask them, a lot of them get surprised. And they'll, some of them will say, I've, yeah, I have a scratchy throat or something like that. And some of them get surprised that it's inflamed. So that's one. But this inflammation is not from infection. That's the point I want people to remember. This is like a sterile inflammation. It's not an infection. It's from—it's just from naughty mast cells misbehaving. So now we are walking into the esophagus, which is the food tube. Is food tube the right term for it?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I think that works. And let's talk about the esophagus for a few minutes, and then we're going to take a quick break and come back. But we could talk about the esophagus for a minute first.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Okay. Um, so the esophagus is affected in several ways in patients with EDS. Uh, let's talk about the one that I worry about the most, and that's called eosinophilic esophagitis, which in English, it means that it's inflammation of the esophagus. Or inflammation of the tube that carries food from the mouth to the stomach. And it's a pretty difficult condition. A lot of these people present with difficulty swallowing. They have difficulty, they feel like food is getting stuck in their esophagus. This inflammation of the esophagus is pretty much similar to MCAS inflammation. And so, and of course, the diagnosis is based on doing an endoscopy. They put a tube down the thing and they look at it and they take some biopsies. And it's not acid reflux. Acid reflux is different. So you can get inflammation from acid reflux as acid goes up. It causes inflammation of the esophagus, but this is an immune-mediated condition that causes esophagitis. And so they have difficulty swallowing, they have food stuck in there, and children have feeding problems. And there's vomiting, there's poor weight gain, and basically failure to thrive.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And I was going to point out that the suffix -itis is inflammation, right? So you can have esophagitis that can be more general related to heartburn or, you know, acid coming up, right? Or you can have eosinophilic esophagitis, which still has -itis at the end inflammation, but that's related to an increased number of eosinophils in the esophagus that they, like you said, found on biopsy.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Right. Eosinophils are cells that start populating, they start collecting wherever there's inflammation. And so that's why it's called eosinophilic esophagitis. Or EOE in short. This was not in the guidelines, by the way. One more thing on the esophagus is it could also be, like we said, in Eagle syndrome, they have difficulty swallowing and it seems like there's something in the throat all the time, but it can also be from craniocervical instability. Both preoperative and postoperative. So it can be from there also.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And that's more neurologically that there's difficulty swallowing, right? Rather than a more structural problem or inflammation.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Right. And oftentimes they have, when they have craniocervical instability, they have one of the complaints they'll have is difficulty swallowing or as if something is stuck in their throat. And it's, but the other one is that after the surgery also they can have inflammation in that area and that kind of, for some time they'll have that difficulty swallowing.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And it comes back with some speech and swallow studies and therapy. It does resolve. Mm-hmm. I can't think of anything else. So we talked about acid reflux. Question is, do people with EDS have more acid reflux? And the answer is yes, they do. Uh, especially if they have MCAS, because uh, it causes more production of histamine in the stomach, and that histamine then causes more acid production. And so they kind of burp up acid, so they get more acid reflux. Hence, H2 blockers, that is, um, famotidine or Cimetidine or something, they can use that. But it's not just—the reason we do use famotidine in MCAS is not just for the acid reflux part, but it's a side benefit.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And what about if the connective tissue isn't as strong as we would like it to be, predisposing you towards a hiatal hernia, or where there's an opening in the diaphragm and part of the stomach is actually like coming up into the chest?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So that's the other thing. Unless it's a really big hiatal hernia, then of course, and it's a problem, then I recommend getting surgery for it. But if it's a small hiatal hernia, leave it alone. Because things can go pretty wrong with hiatal hernia surgeries. And I've seen people getting into trouble.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: We are going to take a quick break. When we come back, we're going to keep going. We're going to go with the stomach, the duodenum, small intestine, large intestine, et cetera. We're going to take a quick break and we'll be right back.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I'm super excited to tell you about the Bendy Bodies Boutique. I am so proud of our fierce styles and flexible designs. These are created by hypermobile artists for hypermobile shoppers. There are so many fun items from clothing, accessories, home goods, and my favorite are the bags. I especially love the Weekender tote with one of the EDS Tough designs. Whether you're shopping for yourself or someone you love, there's so many options to choose from. A portion of the proceeds goes to support EDS nonprofit organizations. For more information, please visit bendybodiesboutique.com. Thank you so much for listening to Bendy Bodies. We really appreciate your support. It really helps the podcast when you like, subscribe, and comment on YouTube and follow, rate, and review on all audio platforms. This helps us reach so many more people and spread the information to everyone. Thank you so much again and enjoy the rest of the episode. I'm back with Dr. Chopra, and we are taking a tour through the GI tunnel, if you will, and we're going to resume at the stomach. Is that where you wanted to head next?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Right. So we started on the teeth. Okay. So teeth, throat, mouth and all that. And then we went down the esophagus. We talked about the esophagus. And now we are in the stomach.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So for those, you know, stomach is kind of a hard thing to explain to people is that this is stomach, but in actuality, stomach is a pouch in our abdomen, right? And that's where the food first goes in there and it gets its acid and all that stuff is mixed in there. So the stomach and the entire tunnel that we talked about, the GI tract, the entire tunnel can be affected by MCAS. We know that, right? Um, which is inflammation of the lining of the intestines, which they really spoke well about in the guidelines, the AGA guidelines, American Gastroenterological Association guidelines. Uh, so but we are going—we're pulling out different things over here. And I think this might be the place to talk about MALS. What do you think?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. I think that's a perfect place to talk about MALS.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah. MALS is an awful condition to have. And for some reason, there is a whole group of physicians who think MALS is like all hokey stuff.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: To me, that makes sense because you have objective evidence, but they're the same people who think that EDS doesn't exist. So, right, right. They're not our audience. No, but I hope they come one day. So MALS stands for median arcuate ligament syndrome. You know, it's also called Dunbar syndrome.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, interesting. Yeah.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So I was giving a talk in Germany and they kept referring to it as Dunbar syndrome. And I was like, that's so much easier to write down instead of the median arcuate ligament syndrome. And when you tell patients, oh, you got median arcuate, and they're like, huh, what?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Like Dunbar syndrome sounds like Dunbar is a nice guy. Sounds like a nice guy. You know, sounds like he lives in the caves and off the land. Definitely. He's an earthy guy. But anyway, MALS is pain that's in what is called the epigastric region. So for those who can't see, it's the, what's called the solar plexus or the upper, upper abdomen. Is that how I could say that?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Mm-hmm. Upper abdomen, mid upper abdomen.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Uh, and that's where you would feel if you had acid reflux. That's what you would feel burning in. So these patients have classical symptoms, very classical symptoms. And one of them is that the pain gets worse with eating. They'll always tell you that the pain gets worse with eating. And obviously, then they have weight loss also, especially in kids. You'll see that they get tired after taking a heavy meal. And the pain increases with physical activity. You know, when I first read about MALS years ago and I wrote down these symptoms, I'm like, this is not—I don't think I'll ever see a patient with MALS. I literally see one every day.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: You see one every single day? Wow.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Well, every single time I see somebody with EDS.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Uh, it's so it's common. I'm not saying it's very rare. It's a common condition. And commonly missed. Here's the thing, it gets better if they lie on their left side. So what I do is I have them in the office, I'll as I'm talking about other things, I'll have them lie on their left side. And then after 10 minutes, ask like, how do you feel? And they'll say like, yeah, they feel better. It does get better with also lying on your stomach. And it gets worse with being upright. And when I examine them, uh, I sort of start, I don't start at the area of their pain, which is the epigastric region or the upper abdomen. I'll start somewhere way off and I start pressing gently, gently and gently. And then I get to the epigastric region. I say, okay, let's call this number 1. And I push down with my thumb. And that's when they get to the, you know, I have a pain scale of my own. Oh, okay. It's called the swear pain scale.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So, you know, that number thing doesn't work for me, right?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. 10 out of 10.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: I don't like either. 10 out of 10 doesn't work for me.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: No.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So I ask them like, what is your worst swear word? And they'll tell me, you know, hey, it's the F word. And I'm like, okay, what's your least favorite? And they'll be like poop or something like that, or some version of that. And so when I press over there, it was like, okay, it's the F word. When I press on the epigastric region with my thumb, they're like, that's the worst pain. And they give you a really dirty look. And I call that number 1. And to be sure, I'll press on some other part of the abdomen with the same pressure with my thumb, and I'll call that number 2. And I'll say like, do you still think 1 is as bad as 2? And then they'll know the 1 is still the worst. So that's MALS. So in a child, it would be failure to thrive. They can't eat. They don't like eating because their belly hurts. And they often get misdiagnosed as functional abdominal pain or something like that. They're not vomiting. It doesn't cause vomiting.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And, and the problem is the celiac artery or the celiac nerve is being compressed, correct? So there are surgical procedures that can be done for this, and sometimes they do a celiac plexus block as part of the workup, correct? But also there's imaging studies that need to be done, cuz of course you wanna make sure if you're gonna do surgery that you're actually going after the right etiology for the person's abdominal pain and other symptoms.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yes. So you're absolutely right. The celiac artery, which supplies blood to the, what's called the foregut or part of your intestine. And then you have the celiac plexus that travels along with the celiac artery, gets compressed by the diaphragm. So for the longest time, we've thought that, oh, it's because the artery is getting compressed. But the actual fact is it's the nerve that's getting compressed. That's what causes the pain. And if you actually look in a patient having a MALS surgery and you look at when they get to that point, the nerve looks inflamed.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Can you see that with the naked eye actually?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Wow.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah. It looks inflamed and swollen. The celiac plexus. But, you know, celiac plexus looks like a bunch of hair. Right. It's so thin. And, but you can see that.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Uh, but the reason why I'm saying the nerve is the culprit is because there are surgeons who believe that it's the artery only.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And so they release the compression that you just said. They release the diaphragm and just the artery and don't touch the nerve. And then there are a group of surgeons that believe that it's the nerve also.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And they'll remove the celiac plexus. And the results of the latter half, the people who remove the celiac plexus are far better than those who don't remove the celiac plexus. So my advice to our listeners is that if you are going in for MALS surgery, make sure that the surgeon is on board with you on that, that they're gonna remove the celiac plexus. Because we've, I have a few patients that have gone to somebody and he just did not remove the celiac plexus. And now I can't convince the other surgeon to go in there again and remove the celiac plexus.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And that's an issue. And you know the nerve block he talked about, the celiac plexus nerve block? Uh, there are two reasons for having that. The first reason is, so they basically go in with a needle and they inject some numbing medicine and it's like magical. Now the patient can eat and there's no pain at all and lots of things get better. A lot of things get better and they're just amazed by how much better. But it only lasts for a few hours as long as the numbing medicine lasts. It has a diagnostic value for the surgeon. Okay, so the celiac plexus, it is MALS. We know that. It is compression of the celiac plexus. But the other one is it also tells the patient, this is how you're going to feel after the surgery. But I have a little secret, unofficial secret on this. The surgeon I go to, I send my patients to is Richard Hsu, Dr. Richard Hsu. In Connecticut, and he disagrees with this completely. He says it actually helps POTS.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, interesting.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So patients have come back and have said their POTS got better. So I call up Dr. Richard Hsu, and I say, hey, did you know that it helps POTS? Don't talk to me about POTS. I don't know anything about it. I'm a surgeon. I don't care. I have no idea what POTS is. I'm like, okay, just saying. Uh, but yeah, it does help a lot. And I, I mean, you know, this is one surgery. I'm not a very huge fan of surgeries, but this is one surgery I really think makes a big difference. And the diagnosis is not that hard. It's really easy. I, you know, we talked about the symptoms, we talked about the exam, and then there's, and then they do a CT angiogram and then they do the celiac plexus block. So it's pretty definitive.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm. So that's, uh, Dunbar syndrome. So that's really interesting that, yeah, yeah. That, uh, that he doesn't seem to think that his patients are doing better with their POTS. But if you don't ask the right questions too, right, then you don't know.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So yeah, but you know, you know something. It's hard for a surgeon to get into the POTS arena.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Oh yeah.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah. As it is, they're stressed out about—this is not an easy surgery for them.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And, you know, I can imagine if I was a surgeon, I would be stressed out to my eyeballs. And so I really feel bad for surgeons because it's not an easy job. And, you know, so they, the last thing they want is something weird, like POTS to deal with.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Because, and honestly, I don't even know why it helps.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Interesting.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: There's no logical sense in that, and it does help, and patients have sworn that it helps. Hmm. So I don't know what to say. Hmm. But anyway, that's just a little aside. Moving on down to our, um, anything else in the stomach? So we have acid reflux from the stomach. We have inflammation from MCAS. Uh, and then we have, uh, the hiatal hernia can be included in this also. Uh, and then we have, uh, MALS. Otherwise, the stomach behaves itself. So let's go down to the small intestine, or the first part of the small intestine, which is called the duodenum. I think this might be the right place to talk about the superior mesenteric artery syndrome.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Either that and/or SIBO, whichever one you wanna talk about first.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Okay. Let's talk about SIBO first.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: You wanna talk about SIBO?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, I will say that SIBO stands for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, and we are not supposed to have bacteria in our small intestines. Correct. And because the transit is slow, we can end up having bacterial overgrowth in the small intestines, which happens much more commonly in people with EDS, MCAS and POTS, conditions like that. And, um, they often get treated with antibiotics and that can be very successful, but sometimes requires a couple of courses. But I'm sure you have other things to add to that.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yes, I do. Uh, so SIBO, um, we have 1,000 different kinds of bacteria that live in our small intestine, and then we have 10,000 different kinds of bacteria that live in the large intestine. And food in the GI tract moves from the small intestine to the large intestine and out. And what happens is that if for any reason your intestine doesn't move, so you have intestinal dysmotility, gastroparesis, or something like that, it's not moving a lot, then what happens is these guys, and that would happen in MCAS. Uh, uh, what happens is that these 10,000 guys that live in the large intestine start creeping over to the small intestine because there are only 1,000 people defending their territory over there. And so these 10,000 guys from the large intestine overrun the small intestine, hence small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. Yes, you're absolutely right. Antibiotics do work, and these are antibiotics that don't get absorbed. They just live in the intestine. So like neomycin and all that, they just live in the intestine. I call it Drano. It's like taking Drano. You're basically killing all these bacteria, right? And then you start putting in fresh bacteria. But the real treatment lies in treating the intestinal dysmotility, right?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Otherwise they'll just recur.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: It'll recur again. And that's what you just said, that we have to do this treatment a few times. But the treatment really is to figure out why is there a slowing down of the GI tract.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And once you can figure that out and treat it, then it takes care of the SIBO, uh, quickly. But otherwise, the treatment, like you said, was antibiotics, or as I call it, Drano, and it essentially just kills everything in there. And then you start fresh with, you start planting new bacteria. You take a lot of prebiotics and probiotics and, you know, eat a lot of yogurt and then you get your bacteria back into their proper territories. The small intestine gets their own and the large intestine gets their own. There are several tests that they do. It's a breath test. And it's the most boring test in the world. You have to breathe into these 10 tubes every half an hour or something like that. So they give you these tubes, test tubes, and every, I think, first you breathe in just like that, and then you take this lactulose thing, and then you start breathing in every half an hour for like 10 tubes, which is 10 times half an hour. It's a really boring test, but that's how they detect it. It's a breath test. They've done studies by actually going in there with a scope and fishing out bacteria and studying, and it doesn't really help in the diagnosis. The best is the breath test. And there are different kinds of breath tests. Is this a good time? So we are still hanging out in the duodenum and the small intestine.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: We are.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yep.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: We are at the junction of the duodenum and the small intestine, to be honest. Let's talk about superior mesenteric artery syndrome.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And this is kind of a hard diagnosis to make.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So these patients present with very nonspecific symptoms. So they'll have pain in their upper abdomen. It's not as bad as the MALS pain because MALS pain is nerve compression. There's no nerve compression here. Mhm. Uh, they present with nausea, which patients with MALS do not have. They don't have nausea. Uh, they do present with abdominal distension, so their bellies get bloated, which you don't see in MALS. And they do have pain in their upper abdomen or their upper abdomen gets worse when they lie flat on their back.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And it gets better when they lie on their left side or on their stomach, same as MALS.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So there's a little bit of difference with MALS, but there's some similarities in there.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: The treatment of superior mesenteric syndrome, uh, superior mesenteric artery syndrome is a little bit all over the place. Let me first explain the reason why people have this superior mesenteric artery syndrome. Uh, without getting into too complicated details, basically there's an artery that travels over the fourth part of the duodenum, and for whatever reason, this artery compresses the duodenum. So it's now compressing it so no food can pass. Which is why they get distension and they also get nauseous. So it's essentially an obstruction of the intestine or obstruction of the fourth part of the duodenum. And this is because of an artery called the superior mesenteric artery. That is a very mischievous artery. It's a real troublemaker. And I'll show you why, because it really causes a lot of problems. So this superior mesenteric artery, you know, compresses the duodenum, and now no food can pass through. So they present with this bloating, they present with nausea, and then they have pain over the duodenal area, which is the epigastric region. It gets better when they lie on their side. It gets worse when they're upright. And the diagnosis is done by doing a CT angiogram. So they shoot some dye into your artery, into your veins, and then they look at where the blood is going, and that's how they decide if they can see the obstruction. So the superior mesenteric artery, uh, is a branch from the aorta.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Abdominal aorta. So there's another big, huge fat artery called the aorta, and the superior mesenteric artery comes off that. And it comes off at an angle. So some people went and studied the angle and they said, oh, when the angle becomes really narrow, that's when the duodenum gets pinched. And why would the angle get narrow is because they're not eating, so they lose weight quickly. And because they lose weight quickly, the angle becomes narrow. Somehow that theory has been accepted by everybody. Except me. I think it's baloney. But anyway, the treatment for that is, are we supposed to use words like baloney?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: You can absolutely use words like baloney.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Okay.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yes.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: The reason why I said that is because the artery is a soft tube. It's a little squishy little tube. And the duodenum is a squishy—is a big squishy tube. How can you take two squishy tubes and compress them together, right? So it doesn't make sense to me at all. So you eat food, you know, you just had a pizza, and now that pizza is floating down your esophagus into your duodenum, and now it's passing through the duodenum. And two squishy tubes can stop that? It doesn't—the problem, the reason why I'm saying that is because the treatment recommended for superior mesenteric artery syndrome is to eat more food, to gain weight. And that is so mind-blowing. When I first read that, I said, no, this can't be true. But it is. And people do recommend it.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, they definitely do.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Number one, you—the whole reason you are at the doctor's office is because you can't eat. You have an obstruction. You're getting bloated, you're getting nauseous, and you have pain after you eat. So how can you gain weight when you can't eat? So the idea is that, oh, if you gain weight, then the angle will become wider. And once the angle becomes wider, it won't obstruct the duodenum anymore. And I don't think that works. Number one, even if that theory is right and I'm wrong, it won't work because people can't eat. That's the whole idea why they're there. And they're not going to gain weight just because they want some fat to go into that space between the artery, between the superior mesenteric artery and the aorta. There are certain treatments that are done. One is, there's one of the treatments is to do a bypass. So they do a gastrojejunostomy. So they completely bypass the, so they make a hole in the stomach and then they make a hole in the jejunum, the small intestine, and then they stitch that up together. So now food goes directly from the stomach into the jejunum, bypasses the duodenum completely. Other surgeries that they do is what is called derotation of the duodenum. So they literally, remember the duodenum lies flat in the back of the abdomen, so they kind of move it or shift it out a little bit and that makes a difference. So there are different surgeons who do different kinds of surgeries and there are different approaches to it. I don't know, I don't have an opinion if one is better than the other.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. That's what I was going to ask you.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah. Yeah. I don't know if any, but I can tell you that eating more food to gain weight is not the way to go.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And what about people having multiple compression syndromes? Because that is also possible, correct?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: That's why I was talking about the mischievous superior mesenteric artery because this superior mesenteric artery then travels downwards and it compresses the renal vein, the vein that comes from the kidney, and that's called Nutcracker syndrome. It's the same artery. So if I suspect superior mesenteric artery syndrome in somebody, or called SMAS, I start suspecting Nutcracker syndrome also. Because the clinical diagnosis of Nutcracker is very difficult. It's blood. Remember we talked about how the amount of blood going into your brain, the same amount of blood has to come out. It's the same thing with the kidney. The amount of blood going to the kidney has to be the same amount coming out. But if you block the exit pathway, if you block the vein, then not enough blood is coming out of the kidney. And that's what's called Nutcracker syndrome. And it can only happen on the left side. It only affects the—because of the anatomy, it can only happen on the left kidney, not the right kidney, which means doing a urinalysis or a blood test for looking at renal function is not going to be helpful because the other kidney takes over the job. The right kidney takes over the job. So blood tests are not really very helpful in these cases.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Is there anything—

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So it's the same superior mesenteric artery that compresses the duodenum and causes superior mesenteric artery syndrome, or SMA syndrome. As it travels down, it now compresses the left renal vein, and the left renal vein is longer than the right renal vein. So these patients can present with blood in the urine. Can they do sometimes have pain on the left flank or even the left abdomen. So technically the kidney is not part of the GI tract, but it's in the abdomen. So that's where we're talking about it.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Uh, the urine may have more protein in it, but that's not a very diagnostic point. In men, they can have varicocele. That means, uh, distended veins in their scrotum.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So these are the common symptoms of Nutcracker syndrome. And as you can see, it's very vague. I mean, you can have blood in the urine from a urinary tract infection. Right.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Or a kidney stone or something.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah. Kidney stone or whatever. Yeah. Are you the same thing, you'll have pain in the left flank and abdominal, abdominal pain if you have a kidney stone. So it's very vague. So you have to do a CT scan. A Doppler ultrasound or a CT angiogram or an MRI angiogram to look at the vein compression. But my antenna starts buzzing when I see superior mesenteric artery syndrome, and I'm like, I have to rule out Nutcracker syndrome because it's the same mischievous artery that's doing it. So the treatment of Nutcracker syndrome is, um, there's one hospital there, one medical center, large medical center where they actually put a stent in the, in the vein, in the left renal vein. And I'm not sure how good an idea that is, putting a stent in a vein. Uh, but, you know, but it's the simplest thing to do. It's easy. It's not a major surgery. But the recommended surgery is to take the left kidney and put it on the right side.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So you do a renal transplant.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So you pick up the left kidney, take it out from its on the left side, and you put it next to its buddy on the right side. That's the treatment, uh, for, uh, Nutcracker syndrome. But I've seen a few patients where they have gone to this particular academic center where they simply put a stent and sent these patients home. And it kind of makes me nervous putting a little stent in a vein, you know, because the renal vein is a very big vein. And so I'm not sure how good that idea is. But anyway, these are the treatments. Yeah.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And it's, and it's also a lot of these patients have MCAS, so you're putting a foreign substance in somebody who is likely, you know, intolerant of some foreign substances anyway.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Oh my goodness. I saw a patient today, just today. They put a stent in his vein, two stents, coils. They put coils. Oh, his— and they had no idea what was wrong with him, and they thought it was a hernia and all kinds of things going on with him. For 5 years, the guy has been looking for treatment. And then I ask him all the questions on MCAS and he meets everything to a T. So, um, yes, I get nervous about putting foreign bodies in people with EDS. Let's go to May-Thurner syndrome. May-Thurner syndrome is technically not an abdominal pain issue, but it can cause abdominal pain. It's more of a leg, left leg problem. And so they, they have a dull, achy heaviness and cramping pain in the left leg, not the right leg, the left leg, swelling in the left leg. And the pain gets worse with standing, left leg again.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Uh, and the pain gets better with elevating the left leg. They may have varicose veins on the left leg. So the left leg has more varicose veins and bigger ones than the right.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Uh, so these are some of the symptoms of May-Thurner syndrome, left leg. And the reason is, uh, it's a little complicated. Uh, but basically there's an artery. So there's an artery on the right side and it kind of crosses over to the left side. And it compresses the left—a vein on the left leg called the left iliac vein. So the right iliac artery compresses the left iliac vein, and that is May-Thurner syndrome. And so because it compresses the vein, the blood slows down. And number one rule in medicine is you never let the blood slow down. Never let the blood slow down. If the blood slows down, it clots. Yeah. That's the number one golden rule.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So once the blood slows down, they start to have clots and then they throw some clots and then they can have all kinds of problems. So that, so when I see, but these patients can also present with pelvic pain.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And that's why we are connecting it to the abdomen is because they can have pelvic pain also. But primarily they'll have is left leg issues. There's dull, achy pain to the left leg. There's varicose veins in the left leg. There's swelling in the left leg. And classically, the pain gets worse with standing and gets better with elevating the left leg. There's another condition that does exactly the same thing. Uh, it's pelvic vein congestion syndrome.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: In pelvic vein congestion syndrome, uh, these patients, uh, their, the veins in the, in the pelvis, uh, get, they collect blood and they get heavier and then they press on the organs and the pelvic floor, and so the pain gets worse with standing. And gets better with uh, legs elevated or lying down. But that's for our next um, episode.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, because we definitely want to talk about the relationship between that and POTS as well. Um, but let's finish May-Thurner because we're going to wrap up with May-Thurner. We need to do our hypermobility hack, and then we're going to continue in part 2 with the rest of the uh, GI tunnel. So for May-Thurner, how are we gonna work this up and then what are we gonna do about it if we make the diagnosis?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Okay, so once they have the diagnosis, uh, then the first thing you do is, and I think, uh, if you suspect May-Thurner, the first thing is to put them on blood thinners. Mm-hmm. Even if you suspect it, because the last thing you want is a clot flying around.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And landing in your lungs or worse, landing in your brain. That would be bad.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Uh, the treatment is often very simple actually. What they do is they put a mesh uh, stent in there, uh, into the left iliac vein and they put a stent in there. Uh, and then they can also, in in some severe cases, they can do surgery where they bypass the, bypass it and decreases the compression. But I think stent works fine in this case.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So a stent in the iliac vein you feel more comfortable with than a stent in the renal vein?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah. It's a different kind of a stent that they put there. It's like a tube.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And it's like a mesh with a tube in there, and there's not much, you know, uh, it, it's, there'll be no problems. We haven't seen that. I mean, even on the left renal vein, I'm not sure. I would be a little nervous, but I'm not sure that if it works well or not, but the recommended treatment for Nutcracker is you take the left kidney and put it on the right side. That's the known treatment.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: But in this case, you can do, uh, you can put a stent in the left renal, in the left iliac vein, and, uh, or else, uh, they just do a bypass.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And, and sometimes we can do testing for metal sensitivity and things like that, but I know that they sensitivity and specificity are not necessarily really super high, right, for those kinds of tests.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yes, you're absolutely right, Dr. Bluestein. And, uh, you know, with, uh, we see this a lot, uh, patients who get metal, metal put into their bodies.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Like chest ports. Chest ports is a big one. Uh, they start reacting. So stents, uh, metal stents and all that, they do start to react and it, it's just, it's a nightmare condition. Mm-hmm.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: I wish they would make it more routine, like, you know, hey, we are putting this metal in your body. We just wanna make sure you're not sensitive to it because a lot of patients don't know that.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And so they can do that.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, not only that, uh, this is a hack. If you have had problems with metal in the past, let your doctors know, like make sure, even if it's just jewelry, because I know somebody who did have a lot of reactions to different metal jewelry. And even if they're using like, you know, I'm thinking of like other implants for fractures or something, and it might be a titanium alloy, but there might be some nickel in there. And maybe you've had reactions to nickel in the past or some other metals. So maybe you are somebody who they should really be thinking about this and testing. And at least I know in some cases the orthopedic surgeons are like, oh no, no, no, that never ever happens. Oh, yes it does.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Uh, yes it does. Uh, yes it does.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And when it happens, it's a nightmare.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: It's a nightmare. Yeah.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Because now you have to remove it and all that. It's a second surgery. It's just awful. You know, I see that in chest ports a lot, by the way, for some reason. Hmm. Yeah. There's one particular brand of chest port that people use, uh, that's kind of non-reactive.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Interesting.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: I do see that. Yeah.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And, and do you think that, uh, I think there's a couple of labs maybe that do some uh, blood testing for metal sensitivity, and there's also a possibility of doing patch testing, but there, I mean, it's better than no information, I suppose, but do you have a preference for which kind of testing if you are going to do that?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Not really. I mean, uh, if they can do patch testing, that's fine. Uh, I don't know. What do they do? Tape a piece of metal on the skin?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I think so.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Oh. Yeah. Or just give them a pair of earrings. So this week you're going to wear titanium. Next week you're wearing stainless steel. Third week you're wearing iron.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And let's look at your ear. Or, um, so, but yes, uh, that's something to keep in mind. And I really think that it should be made more routine given the rise in autoimmune dysfunction and even the massive increase in MCAS patients with chemical sensitivities. This is something that really should be, because you're implanting it into the body.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Right, right.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: It's not an earring that you can take off. Right. And so it should be more routine.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah, absolutely. Because if you can prevent something like that, that's absolutely huge. Um, so we are going to have to cut off right here because, uh, we have so much more to talk about. So I think that we will keep the rest for part 2 of this conversation, if that's okay. But you know we like to end every episode with a hypermobility hack. So do you have a hack for us? Or you've already given us a bunch of hacks, so if you're hacked out, that's also okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: I do. Uh, so it's gastroparesis. Okay. You know, we we sort of talked a little bit about it, but gastroparesis is slowing down of your stomach movements and hence the slowing down of your intestines. And here's the problem. When they test you for gastroparesis, they have you eat this radioactive egg and then they follow it around and see like, okay, how long does it take to pass through?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Right. But the problem with gastroparesis is some days it's fine and some days it's not fine. Right. And you might just go on a good day.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And, you know, a lot of this gastroparesis is related to MCAS. And so your MCAS is not flared up. Your stomach is fine. So I have a home, home, home test for it.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Oh, okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Uh, you eat beets. Hmm. You know beets, those red ones. Mm-hmm.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: I love beets. I eat them all the time. Yeah.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah. So you eat beets and in, and you should have no red color in your poop in the next, after 48 hours. Hmm. If you have red color poop after 48 hours, then you probably have gastroparesis.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Now, now that could be slowing anywhere though in the GI tract, right?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Or true, but it's slowing, is slowing. I don't care. It's still causing me on a, right, causing me to bloat up and feel nauseous. So I really don't care where the slowing is, but it's slowing. And so, uh, because you go in for a radioactive egg test and they say, oh, it's fine. And then I know this one patient I have, she had it done 5 times and it was the 5th try they found out. I'm like, so I figured out like, what if you eat beets?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Now, how many beets do you have to eat?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: I don't know. I mean, ample amount of beets to do that.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: I've thought of other things like, can you eat—what about marbles?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Marbles? I don't know if that's a good idea. Maybe carrots. I don't know. You could see pieces of carrots if they're not fully digested, but then, no, maybe that's not the right thing. But beets. Okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: So beets, we'll stick with beets. We'll stick with beets because the idea, listen, this is a problem with me brushing my teeth. Okay. So marbles was one of the things I thought of and I said, well, the day the marbles come out, you can hear them, right? And you can count. So if you ate 10 marbles and you reached number 9 and the 10th one is still in there, there's probably some slowing, right? But we don't recommend doing that.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: No, don't eat marbles.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Don't do that. Don't try that at home.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: All kinds of bad things could happen.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah, please don't do that. Just eat beets. But you can, you have to eat ample amount of beets because you wanna be really make sure your poop is red.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. And, and it might be helpful to track when it first starts turning red and then when it stops turning red. I think, I think that'd be helpful.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: So, okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Like if a week later you're still having red poop, then you're probably have slowing of the GI tract. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. So it's a little home test. It can be done without loving. Yeah.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. That's a great hack.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: I don't have any. Yeah, that's pretty much it.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay. Okay. That's a great hack. Can you remind us where we can find out more about what you're up to these days?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: You know something, I'm sorry, I know the time is short, but I just wanted to remind people on something which is very, very important. When we were at the teeth, if you're, for some reason, dentists love pulling out your, uh, your wisdom teeth. And I think we talked about it in the last podcast. Like, I don't know why they love taking out the, uh, the wisdom teeth, but they do. Now, if you have EDS, then please wear a collar. A hard collar when you go to the dentist, because we have had cases where people have developed craniocervical instability when they went in for a dental extraction or some kind of nose surgery or something and developed craniocervical instability. And it's not a few. We see this very commonly. And even though you can tell the dentist that, or you can tell the ENT surgeon, or even if you're getting general anesthesia, they forget because they're busy trying to, you know, do whatever they're doing in your mouth or your nose. And they forget. And what happens is, although anesthesiologists are good about that, I have to say that, but they forget. And I think my, if I were to, if I had EDS, I would put up a nice little iron brace around my neck and go, because I don't want you to extend my neck no matter what.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Uh, but a good brace is a Miami J collar or a Vista Aspen collar, but it has to be hard brace. Even though you do not have CCI, you don't want to get CCI.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm. And are you suggesting that they wear it for the actual procedure then? The whole—

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yes.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: The actual procedure, because I've seen so many people develop CCI after tooth extraction or something like that.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: And it's very alarming. So the reason I, that came to my mind was because you asked me where I, where you wanna know what I'm doing next.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Mm-hmm.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Uh, I, I kind of, when I come across something that's alarming or that's something people should know, I post it on my website. It's a blog I post there. It's called PainRI, painri.com, and I'll post it there. And, but this one we are publishing a paper. We have a case series of 8 patients where they developed CCI after a procedure.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And is there any problem with the dentist actually accessing what they need to access with the hard collar? And because that limits their range of motion and of the jaw, right?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Ah, don't worry about that. The dentist, they're good at taking out teeth from anybody.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: They'll, they'll, they'll figure it out. Yeah. Because once you get CCI, they're not, they're not gonna be around. So don't, you can always lift up your upper part of your face to open your jaw, or you can even pull down the little chin strap a little bit. But you can, I mean, after all, you can eat with a brace on, so you can open your mouth adequately.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah. Okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: But this is serious. I really think it's alarming. And I did, I did talk to one of the neurosurgeons who does a lot of this work. And he said that he sees it all the time. Did not have CCI, went in for a procedure on the face, went in for dental extraction, developed CCI after that. Yeah.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: And that's awful. If that's awful, if that happens. Okay. So we'll be looking for that paper also. Yeah.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Thank you.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Yeah. I have to get around to writing it.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Okay.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: But it is, I have the cases.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: How many cases will be in that paper?

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Um, I picked 8, but I have more.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Wow. I'm, I'm trying to cut corners.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Yeah.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Just lazy. So, so I put in 8. I mean, if 8 is not enough to convince people that I, I don't know what, what do you mean? 200 cases? I mean, really?

Dr. Linda Bluestein: No, it's a lot. So, okay, great. Well, thank you so much. It was so great to chat with you again, and I look forward to part 2 of this conversation.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Our walk through the GI tract, through the GI tract tunnel. Mm-hmm. Yeah, absolutely.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: It'll be fun.

Dr. Pradeep Chopra: Thank you so much for having me.

Dr. Linda Bluestein: Well, that was fun. Fun with Dr. Chopra going through the first part of the GI tract or the GI tunnel. I know a lot of people have symptoms in their abdomen, and so I think this is going to be really helpful for so many people. And I hope you will stay tuned for part 2 of this conversation. Thank you for listening to this week's episode of Bendy Bodies with the Hypermobility MD podcast. You can help us spread the word about joint hypermobility and related disorders by leaving a review and sharing the podcast. This really helps raise awareness about these complex conditions. If you would like to meet with me one-on-one, please check out the available options on the services page of my website at hypermobilitymd.com. You can also find me, Dr. Linda Bluestein, on Instagram, Facebook, TikTok, Twitter, or LinkedIn at Hypermobility MD. You can find Human Content, my producing team, at Human Content Pods on TikTok and Instagram. You can find full video episodes every week on YouTube at @bendybodiespodcast. To learn about the Bendy Bodies program disclaimer and ethics policy, submission verification and licensing terms, and HIPAA release terms, or to reach out with any questions, please visit bendybodiespodcast.com. Bendy Bodies Podcast is a Human Content production. Thank you for being a part of our community, and we'll catch you next time on the Bendy Bodies Podcast.
